Hello?
Good morning.
Hi, can you hear me? Yes, I can. Is that, uh, Mr.
Sodi? Is that you talking?
Yes, I am. Is it Sodi or, uh, Mr. Sing? I,
Mr. I mean my son. Yeah,
it Singh got Sodi. Doesn't matter
All. I just wanna make
sure we got right, okay? Yes.
Now we've got 10 minutes with you. Um, yep.
We just for people listening Yep.
All committee members have read reports, so we've read them.
So what I urge you,
and I'm just not saying this particularly for you, Mr.
Sodi, but I'm just saying, uh,
summarize the most important points for us please.
And then leave us a little bit of time for questions.
Otherwise, I'm just gonna have to move on.
Unfortunately, we've got a lot. Sure. So, no problem.
Sorry, just helping you out there.
So time is yours. Thank you. Okay.
All right. Thank you Mr. Chair
and members of the committee
for the opportunity to speak today.
My name is OMI Erdi.
I'm speaking on behalf of Dairy and Business Owners Group.
Our group supports the crime amendment bill,
and we also support the further recommendations made by mag.
We also believe that the changes are
needed and long overdue.
Both the bill and the MAG recommendations are about giving
better protection to victims of retail crime,
including retailers and workers and business owners.
At the center of what we want
to say today is one simple point.
Victims should be at the heart
of New Zealand justice system,
and the law should be on the side of the victims.
For too long, many retailers
and business owners have felt
that the system has not been on their side.
They have felt exposed, stressed,
and left to deal with the same offending again and again.
While offenders learn how to work around weak laws,
almost new consequences.
And retail crime is not victimless.
When people talk about chef shoplifting,
as it is a small issue,
they often think only about item being stolen,
but they do not think about the person behind the counter.
They do not think about the law abiding dairy
owner working alone.
They do not think about the worker
who has already been threatened before
and now feels every time someone suspicious walks in.
Uh, for, for our members,
this is just not about stolen goods.
It is about fear. It is about stress.
It is about feeling unsafe at your own work,
which in many cases is a place of their residence as well.
It it is about mental pressure that builds up
after repeated theft, threats, aggression,
and sometime assault.
Our written submission says clearly
that retail crime affects businesses, workers, communities,
and the wider public sense of safety.
Many people in our group work long hours,
often alone in small shops and dairies.
When someone comes in and steals openly, acts aggressively
and threaten staff, that leaves a very real impact,
and that impact does not go away when the offender leaves.
It stays with the victim over time.
It leads to anxiety, stress,
and in some cases, mental health issues.
We have. We have also seen how organized offenders
and repeat offenders learn to take advantage of the system.
They know how to find loopholes.
They know how to offend at levels
where they think they'll face little or no consequences.
A written submission says, think theft rings are often one
of the biggest problems retailers face,
and they organized, they steal to order,
and they that they are linked to wider criminal activity,
including gangs and drug trade.
That is why we support stronger action.
We support stronger penalties for theft.
We support recognition of the human harm
and caused by aggressive theft.
And we support better protection for victims
who act responsibly to defend themselves, their staff,
their customers, and their property.
The crime amendment bill is, uh, is important to us.
It helps update the law around the defense of the property
and citizen's arrest.
These are not there to encourage confrontation.
These are there as an optional
and additional legal tool to protect victims,
including retailers, business owners, when real
situation happens in real life.
I want to be very clear.
We do not encourage engagement or physical confrontation.
No responsible group wants its workers
or shop owners to be put in danger.
Our, our own written submission says Intervention is never
worth the risk, but victims are also human beings
in the heat of the moment.
If victim acts reasonably,
or if a security guards acts reasonably follow the proper
process, calls police
and follows police instructions,
then the law should be on their side, not turn against
that particular victim.
The law should protect victims,
not make them feel like they are the wrongdoers.
The provided material also stresses police involvement
and reasonableness as an important safeguard.
In our view, shoplifting and retail crime
and New Zealand have become far too common for far too long.
For many retailers, it's relentless.
The harm from the theft, aggression, assault,
and the fear, mental stress has been overlooked
for too long, and that needs to change.
We do acknowledge that crime is being taken more seriously
now, and that is a positive step,
but attention alone is not enough.
The law needs to up to be updated.
So it clearly supports victim, frontline workers
and small business owners.
And that is why our group supports the bill,
and that is why we also support the further
recommendations made by Mayor.
Our message is simple.
Retailers and workers want to know
that parliament understands what they are going through.
Victims deserve more sympathy after the harm is done.
They deserve the law that stands
with them when it matters the most,
that is why we support these changes,
and that is why we ask this committee
to keep victims at the heart
of the justice system. Thank you, Mr. Vale.
All right, thank you. Can I just, um,
I'm gonna start the questioning
because there have been some submitters who, uh, imply
the, obviously there's a opportunity for employees to be in,
involved in disarming, people coming in, stealing,
but you represent owners, um, dairy and business owners.
So is the, is the important,
you use the word, this is an option.
What, what I think I detect
and I didn't hear explicitly is obviously, it,
it all business owners and
and their employees have the option to, to use this.
But for you as business owners mainly of, you know, stores,
retail operations, whatever, this is an important issue
for you as owners to be able to do that, that
that's a point of differentiation.
Is that what I,
and is that who you're representing the owners
of those retail operations, who in many cases, uh,
very small operations? Mm-hmm.
Yeah. Look, there are, uh, Mr. Bailey,
there are about two. Sorry.
No, no, go, go, go. Please. Yeah.
So there are about more than 13,000
small retailers in New Zealand.
Okay. And it's not only about the owners,
it's about the frontline workers.
Many of those retail owners have frontline,
and also the law impacts the, the customers
or the clients that they are in the shops.
So it's just not about the owners.
Okay. I've got Mr. Cal Bates.
Yeah. Morning up. Good to see you this morning.
Thanks for clearly explaining the challenge
and the issue that needs
to be addressed from your perspective.
My question is simple.
Is there anything in the proposed bill
that you think should be different from
what the government has proposed?
Look, uh, we, we support the recommendations being by Mag,
and I think those amendments should be considered alongside
the recommendations made by Mag.
So that's where our, our group supports those amendments,
those, those submissions. Yeah.
Good. I've got honorable, uh, Ginny Anderson.
Oh, thank you very much. And thank you
for your submission today.
Um, I'm really interested to know, we, we've had a bit
of advice, um, or views of from police that,
because often police are unable to attend
all of these instances.
So say these, I'm talking about citizen's arrest.
So if there's a, a a time when, uh, a shop owner, one
of your members has phoned the police, they've, um,
citizen put a citizen's arrest on, uh, someone
who they think has been stealing, they've restrained them,
they're in their shop, they've called police
and said, I'm doing everything I'm meant to do.
Police aren't able to come
because there's other, uh, more urgent jobs in that area.
Uh, are you gonna provide any guidance to members
or do you have any views about what happens at
that point in time when the police are unable to come?
You have a restrained potential offender on your premises
that could be dangerous to not only the owner,
but also the customers.
What, what do you envisage happening
in, in, in that scenario?
Look, um, thank you for the question, Jenny.
And I think that's an important question.
And we, we would want to work with police in these sort
of, uh, situations.
Look, the, in, in a hypothetical scenario,
I can say many things,
but when the real life scenario happens, that's where it's,
it's quite situational.
If the police can't come
and there's a citizen's arrest, I think there has
to be some guidelines,
and we will work on those guidelines as, as a, as a group,
and we will consult those guidelines
with police if those situations happens. Whatever. I
Just one more, do, do you have any concerns
that the person, if they had to be released,
so police can't come for maybe an hour or 90 minutes, uh,
and so you're required to release them under the, under the,
the current legislation.
Uh, do you have any concern that that might heighten the,
uh, propensity of the proposed shoplifter
to be violent against the shop owner?
They might know that, Look, uh,
there there's a possibility, Ginny.
Uh, but look, as I said, that as, as a group,
we wanna work alongside police when the situations happens.
What, as a, as a shop owner
or what, as a, as a frontline worker, we should be doing,
these are situational things
and it, it could, it could be, uh, the matter of
that you talking with the, uh, with the offender, uh,
while you, you, you know,
and just trying to find the best possible
situation like outcome at that situation.
Thank you, Mr. Sodi. Thank you.
And thank you for answering those questions. Very helpful.
Right. Um, we're gonna move on, um, very relevantly to,
uh, the police association.
Mr. W, uh, what, sorry.
Um, you've got 10 minutes. You know what to do,
And thank you for having me today.
Steve Watt from the New Zealand Police Association.
Uh, the association supports the protections, uh,
for undercover officers.
We support the proposal to increase penalties on assaults
for first responders, and we acknowledge the support
and attention given to coward punches.
The association, however, is strongly against the changes
to citizens' arrest powers,
and the changes to the defense of property.
I urge this committee to keep in the front of mind
that being arrested
and placed in custody can be a stressful experience,
and people's behaviors can become volatile
and unpredictable.
What these changes propose put ordinary members
of the public at an unacceptable risk to, of injury
to themselves, other members of the public
and the alleged offenders.
Our members are highly trained individuals.
They understand the law and, uh,
and also also have, are very well equipped,
and they understand when to use reasonable force to deal
with volatile situations.
And it would be fair to say that despite all this training
and equipment, our members still on occasion get it wrong.
Yet, what this proposal seeks is an expectation of Audi
ordinary members of the public to be able
to get it right despite limited to no training.
In order for citizens' arrest to be lawful,
they must immediately contact police once the arrest is
made, and there will be misguided expectations on
police to turn up.
In the year 2023 to 2024,
there were 140,000 reported incidents of retail crime.
40% of retail crime goes unreported.
There has been a lack of attention given
to the practical implications on our members in police time
and resourcing, and the likely outcome that
many instances will not meet the priority threshold
of police for attendance.
This places those making citizens arrest,
as the minister mentioned, at extreme risk of serious harm,
should they have to release the person
they have just arrested.
The concept around allowing citizens to lawfully hit strike
or otherwise cause bodily harm
and defensive property is completely unacceptable.
This is seen as giving a license to assault
and a perception of legal protection for risky behavior
in which an onus would be placed on those using such force
to prove it was reasonable.
There is little to no understanding
amongst ordinary citizens around the legal definition
of reasonable force.
Therefore, this will result in ordinary citizens facing
charges themselves.
We understand the drive for solutions
to aggressive shoplifting events, however, the answers
provided in this bill's proposals requires an
unjustifiable risk. Thank you. Okay.
Thank you very much. I've got a number
of questions, Dr. Nan.
Thank you, chair. Thank you so much
for coming and for your submission.
Um, I would just wanna pick up on the last point you
mentioned, because also noting the previous submitters said
in their submission, but in the heat of the moment,
human reactions happen, and that could happen both ways.
I want to check with you the, to elaborate on the risk
of potentially exacerbating and escalating the situation
and the harm that could be, that could happen to those
who are trying to attempt
citizens arrest being my first question,
and I have one small follow up.
Yeah. Look, and that's, you're absolutely bang on.
You know, our police officers are trained in communication
and deescalation skills so that it doesn't get to the point
where we need to use physical force.
Don't get me wrong, we do have to on occasion,
but deescalation and communication is the first point.
And I'm not sure that those in the retail industry are
appropriately trained in those aspects, and
therefore it will result in, in, in, uh, um, assaults,
um, from both sides. One more,
And just one of the things that's in the bill
and the ministry advisory group recommended 18
plus, but the bill doesn't.
What do you think is a potential risk
around having citizens risk for people under the age of 18
and having no age restriction?
Yeah, look, it's a real, uh, risk.
At the end of the day, uh, shop owners aren't going
to ask potentially what their age is, uh, of a, of a person.
And it's extremely hard to tell on occasion
how old somebody is.
So there's a real risk that underage, uh, youth
will be caught up in citizens arrest.
Okay, Mr. Todd Citizen,
Hopefully two relatively quick questions.
Thank you for being here.
Uh, you've acknowledged retail crime as a problem.
We obviously heard from this first submitter.
So I just wanna, just for clarity, um,
putting aside resource constraints, everything else is
that the police association's position that retail crime
theft should be investigated and people prosecuted.
Look, I think that's the expectation of any, uh,
member in the community that if there is a report, uh,
it should be reported to police, um, investigated
and hopefully resolved.
Thank you. And just one quick one on the coward punch.
I've read your submission, but,
and then you said in the, I just
wanna, again, just more for clarity.
You're broadly supportive of the idea of a coward punch,
but it's just, you wanna make sure it's workable
and it actually delivers a result.
Is that just to make sure that Yeah. Yes, that's
Correct. Yes. Okay. Thank you.
Cool.
I've got, um, honorable Jean Anderson.
Thank you very much, and thank
you for your submission, Steve.
Um, every police officer I've spoken to, uh, so far has said
that, that this is an absolute
disaster just waiting to happen.
Not only the citizen's arrest,
but ability for anybody in the public
to strike someone else.
Um, is there any way, from your experience,
you can give us any kind of indication about
how big a mess this is going
to be when it actually gets rolled out?
Yeah, absolutely. And you, you look, need
to look no further than, you know,
our members' experiences in regards to arrests
and, um, things like that.
You know, we've had people die in custody simply
because of positional asphyxiation.
So when you think of arresting someone,
detaining someone sitting on them while you wait for police,
we are trained to recognize positionless asphyxiation
where general members of the public are not.
Um, and we still, as I say, do not get it right every time.
So the realities of the bill passing as it is,
is it could actually result in, um,
death in manslaughter charges. Yes,
Absolutely. Uh,
is there anything you think that we should do
as a committee to try
and mitigate some of these measures
that would not only protect police officers in the front
line, but the general public from further harm?
Yeah. The reality is, is as it stands at the moment,
the risk is just simply too great to members of the public,
um, completing citizen's arrests.
Um, I would probably need a bit more time to consider
what exactly the steps that should be put in place
that might mitigate, um, the risks to both police
and the public, and give you a more full, uh, answer for
That. Do you think last one, do,
do you
think just one quick one. No,
No, we got Thanks.
Cheer. Um, thanks for the submission
and appreciate the points you make on Citizens Arrest.
Is your view that we should simply have the current settings
for Citizens arrest, or do you recognize
and accept that there are already confusion within the
citizen arrest powers and
therefore there are some changes that should occur?
Look, I think the current powers
as they stand within the bill are sufficient.
I think generally people understand, uh,
the current provisions around citizens arrest
and they're implemented accordingly.
So I do not see, um, a necessity to change
dramatically what is already currently in place.
So to clarify, you think the average person understands
that, uh, they can only undertake a citizen's arrest if it's
after 9:00 PM at night, that they have
to calculate the value of what's been stolen,
the thousand dollars, uh, and they have to know
and have an in-depth knowledge of whether
or not something would have a three year sentence?
I think what most general members
of the public understand is that it has to be extremely, um,
uh, you know, an an extreme situation in which they would
step in, and the law
as it currently stands, allows for that.
And that's what the public understanding.
Right. Thank you very much Mr. Wat.
Um, very helpful, uh, submission, right. Salvation Army.
We've got, um, on Zoom.
I think
they on Zoom.
Yeah. Cool. Members, um, a lot of questions.
So you, I'm gonna move it around a bit, right?
Have we got our members here?
Here we go from Salvation Army. Good morning to both of you.
Um, we've got 10 minutes, please.
We've got a lot of questions, so, um, uh,
if you can just give us a bit
of time for questioning, that'd be great. Thank you.
Oh, thank you. So that's committee,
and thank you again, uh, for the opportunity to speak, uh,
to you, um, all this morning.
Um, my name is Anna, and I'm joined
with my colleague, uh, Paul.
We from the Salvation Army Social
Policy and Parliamentary Unit.
Um, I just wanted to acknowledge that the crimes me,
this current bill before you covers a wide range of areas,
uh, but we'll be focusing solely on the slavery,
trafficking, um, and exploitation,
because that's, uh, the areas that sort of I impact
that come through our front lines.
And so I just wanted to acknowledge that the Salvation Army,
um, we're an international movement,
and so we in more than 130 countries,
and so we have a large global footprint, um,
and we have a longstanding international, uh, commitment,
uh, to preventing modern slavery and human trafficking.
Um, I just want to spend some time going, uh, through some
of what we are seeing in the front lines,
and then I'll hand it across to Paul.
Um, what we encounter, uh,
like people often experiencing exploitation in ways
that are subtle, ordinary,
and often hidden in plain sight, you know,
their situations don't always match the public image of
what slavery looks like.
Um, but they absolutely reflect the patterns of coercion,
control independency, uh, that this current bill
before you is trying to address, um,
or define, you know, we regularly support individuals, um,
whose wages have been withheld for long periods, uh,
leaving them to, um, unable to meet their basic needs.
And we also meet workers whose visas tie them to unsafe
or corrosive employment.
Um, and we see, uh, women
who are often brought into private homes under the guise
of legitimate work only to become isolated, unpaid.
Um, but alongside these, um, primary harms of exploitation,
we see the secondary impacts.
And that's often, um, what we are seeing first.
Uh, people will come to us, they come to us often
because they've run outta food, they're facing eviction, um,
or they can't afford their rent.
Um, in our food bank, our housing services,
our social workers are often the first
ones to see this distress.
And it's not until we start
to understand their circumstances and the crisis
and that they're facing that, um, we can identify
that it's actually exploitative employment,
corrosive control and elements of modern slavery.
Um, right here, ino, we, we see these patterns so often, uh,
that the Salvation Army, we have an appointed modern slavery
and human trafficking social worker.
Um, and we also have appointed a, uh,
territorial modern slavery,
human trafficking response coordinator across the
New Zealand, Tonga, Fiji, and Samo territory.
Um, and these roles exist
because of the, the level of, um, uh, these issues
that are coming through our front doors, you know, the,
the strengthened penalties
and clearer definitions, um, in the spill
before you matter, um,
because they better reflect the realities of coercion, uh,
that our services see.
And so these refinements help, um, make visible the types
of exploitation, um, that have for too long,
remained hidden, um, be behind sort
of the challenges that we see.
I'm just gonna hand it over to Paul, uh, to outline, uh,
that this, this bill
before you cannot exist, um, by itself in order
to make a difference, uh, for,
but it's a, for for those that we support,
but it's a positive step forward.
Yeah. Koto. Yeah.
Thank you very much for the chance to speak to you today.
I just really want to, I mean, it's one year, actually,
almost to the day that we are in front
of the same select committee along with other NGOs calling
for changes to the penalties for slavery offenses.
That was part of an earlier members bill from Greg Fleming.
Um, it's taken a while, but we're pleased
to be back in front of this committee supporting this part
of the current crimes amendment bill
that does include the changes called for last year.
Um, and just adding to what Ana has said, um, you know,
the stories that we've shared in our submission, um,
underline the need for the other pieces
and the ledgers that have puzzled to be completed
to help make, um, our, our responses country to, uh,
for slavery and trafficking more effective.
Um, the modern slavery bill is currently in parliament,
and we support that bill
and that that will create a, a help create a, um,
reporting requiring companies
to be more transparent about what's going on in their supply
chains and taking action to prevent slavery.
Alongside this, we also need a greatly improved process for
identifying and protecting potential victims of slavery
and trafficking and much better survivor support.
Um, and central to this is the national referral mechanism
that we would like to see developed
to provide consistent support.
And finally, with there is the aspect too of, um,
this, the national plan
of action against forced labor people trafficking
and slavery actually ended last year in 2025,
and as yet, there's no replacement for that.
Uh, and, um, the passing
of this legislation we see should be the impetus
to move quickly to develop a new plan of action
in consultation with survivor representatives, NGOs,
and other stakeholders.
Um, and crucial to that
and, um, is making sure
that victim survivors are not treated as criminals,
but as people who have been deceived abused, who need
to be safe and believed,
and that while the real perpetrators are
investigated and prosecuted.
So, thank you for making the changes in this bill,
and we urge the select committee to encourage government
to continue to create the full set
of necessary rules for protection
Question. Right.
Hey, thank you to both of you.
Any questions from members?
I'm very, we are very grateful, uh, to hear your support
for the bill.
Um, and, uh, it's good to get that perspective.
So thank you for your submission this morning. Thank you.
Got it. Thank You. Thank you.
Now, um, members, we're going to Mr.
Lin, um, by
Zoom, Mr.
Lin, uh, good morning. We've got, uh, five minutes with you.
Um, please just leave a little bit of time
for questions, if you may.
Sure.
Koto, uh, call Andrew Lin Koua.
Uh, thank you for the opportunity to present my submission
for the Crimes Amendment Bill 2025.
My submission draws on my professional experience across
both the public and community sectors
where I've been responsible for balancing staff safety,
legal compliance, and public trust,
and complex high risk environments.
That experience shapes my views on this bill.
I support the intent of the bill
and the recognition that retail crime, violence,
and human trafficking are real and serious issues.
I'm also concerned that several
of the proposed amendments are unlikely
to achieve their stated objectives
and may create new risks while updating outdated time
of day restrictions is reasonable.
This bill risks encouraging intervention
and nonviolent offending that would
otherwise be safely dealt with later by police.
A $50 shoplifting offense, likely driven by poverty,
should not become a physical confrontation that places staff
offenders and bystanders at risk.
Existing case law already recognized, recognizes,
strikes the head and neck as severe aggravating factors
with manslaughter convictions already being secured.
Introducing overlapping offenses does not align
with high quality legislation.
Having worked at corrections, I know the harm faced
by first responders
and corrections officers evidence in New Zealand
and internationally shows harsher penalties does not reduce
assaults without addressing issues like understaffing.
This approach risks high incarceration
with little deterrent effect.
As the bill references the ministerial advisory group,
it'll be prudent to highlight the foundational study cited
in the group's retail crime report,
which con directly contradicts their own recommendations
that has informed the amendment before the committee today.
In conclusion, this bill seeks to create simple fixes
to complex problems, overestimating, deterrence,
and underestimating real world consequences.
It will likely increase in inequality, particularly
for Maori who are already over-represented at every
stage of the justice system.
I urge the committee to reconsider these provisions
and focus and sit on evidence-based responses
that genuinely improve safety for all.
I welcome any questions many may have.
Very good, um, wide ranging submission,
which is, uh, very good.
We've got Dr. Nan first.
Uh, Andrew, thank you so much for your submission.
Um, can I just check with, with you, yes.
Because you support the intent, uh, which is,
which is important, but not the specific specificity.
Can I just check what are some of you mentioned in terms
of the first responder part, in terms of yes, the staffing,
um, in terms of some of the other things
around retail crime, et cetera.
Do you have, what would be your alternative solution in
terms of your experience in the sector?
Sure. To address the root cause of the issue,
I think the reality is, in my opinion, I,
I strongly believe that legislation is not the correct
answer or the correct solution to this problem.
Theft is, uh, is happens
and occurs in extreme in a, a wide variety of reasons.
In my personal experience, uh, when people come
to corrections for shoplifting offenses,
it can range from mothers stealing to buy groceries
for children to gangs, uh, mail on order, uh,
asking their gang members to go shoplift products,
uh, for their own use.
Therefore, it is impo, it is not, uh, practical
for legislative, uh, solutions
to address such a wide ranging, uh,
so many different reasons for why people shoplift.
Okay. I'm going to Mr. Tom Rufi. Thanks.
Uh, thank you Andrew. Andrew,
part five Offenses against first responders
and corrections officers.
Yes. You cite, um, some evidence from Australia, uh,
Victoria and Western Australia.
Correct. Uh, and you recommend that
mandatory sentencing does little to minimize the risk
of being assaulted when attending incidents of family
and domestic violence?
Yes. You say that, um, people
who harm our first responders, so our police,
our firefighters,
our emergency responders in some sense shouldn't be held
to a higher level, uh, through their,
in response to their criminal activity.
Can you, can you give me some justification as
to why you think that should be the case?
So we're talking about evidence, real practical.
Uh, what happens in reality as opposed to opinion yes.
Is that, uh, we, it has, there's evidence
and it has been shown that, uh, simply by introducing
or increasing the amount of penalties,
it does not actually real realistically do anything.
Um, whether or not you agree
or obviously I think we all agree that, um,
there should be extremely serious consequences
or serious consequences for offending against our, uh,
frontline and, and, and first responders.
This is not the way, the reality is.
Emotions as, uh, you know,
Steve from the Police Association mentioned, um,
arresting people is not a, it, it is a serious business, and
therefore when people are undergoing that situation,
emotions are running high.
You need trained, experienced professional people
to undergo that process.
And therefore, um, the, the, the reality is
that things does happen
and that when, when police sign up to do their job,
there is recognition
that they are putting themselves at harm's way.
I'm just supplementary to that.
The, this doesn't just apply to the police.
So, no, of course not.
Um, For example, I used to be a volunteer firefighter
that would count as a first responder.
We, we aren't trained to, um, but
You should be, everybody should first, first all.
They should be trained to be able
to handle the situations they are being put in in.
And therefore, I would, I would say is that
in those situations, as a firefighter, as a,
as a ambulance officer, as a whoever it is that's showing up
to these situations, they should be trained to be able
to handle the situations they've been asked to attend.
Okay? Yes. But the situations we are attending are not,
And legislation's not the fix
Yes. Won't
increase the competency of frontline staff.
I, I might just try and get a question out of That's okay.
Which is, um, the first responders in this case, say,
our firefighters, for example, they're trained
to fight fires, um, yes.
To help people with resuscitation, to assist with, uh,
motor vehicle accidents and things like that.
The responses in the space of what the police do is, again,
a different line of first responding work.
Yes. Why can't we provide our first responders the
protection that they deserve when they turn up
to do their job, to help keep our community safe?
So the protection they deserve is better training
and better resourcing and more staffing to be able
to attend those situations at the right time
with the right experience and the right skills.
Alright. Hey, thank you Mr. Lin. Very, uh, thoughtful.
Good to have your practical dimension to you.
Um, submission. Thank you very much.
This morning, right now we've got Mr.
K Khaw, I dunno who you are. Um, I
Got, uh, Ridge as one of the Retailers.
Cool. Now we've got you for 10 minutes now.
Uh, five minutes now. Yes.
And then we're obviously gonna roll into
the next submission as well.
So, um, please, you've seen, uh,
the committee was keen to ask questions.
Yeah. So we'll do the questions
when we have the 10 minutes.
Uh, uh, max submission.
So, Kira Kato, uh, I'm delighted to speak, uh, in support
of the retail crime proposals in the will.
My submission will focus on the background of the will,
the retail crime epidemic
that took over New Zealand from 2019.
And the work I have done to connect with small retailers
and bring their voice to the table, the substance
of the proposals will be addressed in mag submission.
So how did we get here?
New Zealand experienced a rapid ation of law
and order over recent years.
In 2019,
we had 4,000 monthly reports of retail crime.
By the end of 2023,
there were over 11,000, uh, monthly reports.
It went from one ram rate every three days
to three RAM rates every one day.
It leaves it behind destruction, trauma, pain,
less vibrant town centers, and a higher cost for consumers.
Retail crime. In New Zealand, Mr.
Chair is costing us $2.7 billion per annum.
That is over $50 million per week,
or over $7.2 million per day.
And that is the cost.
All hardworking New Zealanders are paying at the tail.
But for victims of retail crime, it means more,
it means lost livelihoods and lost lives.
Today I'm joined by Uri Prakash,
who owns a sports goods store in hot belly, repeatedly
targeted by organized theft rings.
His store was first burgled three weeks after the opening.
I'll give a little page set up.
After the recent, um, incident attack tells his story,
burgled, robbed, robbed, robbed, then burgled again.
All within a year.
Since then, AEs hammers, burglary, robbery.
He has seen all except the consequences for the offenders.
His children are traumatized.
He sleeps on the floor of the shop every night
because he can't afford to lose more.
Last month, police caught the offenders, a 20-year-old,
few teenagers and a 9-year-old.
And recently sur received an invitation
to attend a family group conference.
The purpose of the meeting to see
how best support the offenders who have destroyed his life,
not support for him, support for the offenders.
Can you imagine the injustice committee members?
I ask you this today, where have you gone wrong as a nation,
as a country, that this is how we respond to victims
of crime.
How toned death is justice system.
The problem in my view
is the last labor government focused too much on criminal
justice reform, government set targets about
how many criminals they can let go
ize certain crime approach.
The biggest challenge that we face is the perception
by the criminals that they are untouchable.
That there are no consequences for their actions, that, uh,
police won't respond.
Even if they do, the court would let them go.
This sense of impunity is harming us all.
And this need to stop.
And that is what all my work has been focused on,
creating a zero tolerance approach to retail crime.
We had over 40 stakeholder engagements across the country
from Kaia to in Cargill.
We listen to the challenges that retailers face.
Crime is an issue that affects every retailer,
but not every retailer has a voice.
Small retailers can't afford lobbyists
and lawyers like the corporate scam,
yet they're the ones at the front line.
And today, I thank you all to those submitters
who have submitted in support
of the retail crime proposals in the Will,
New Zealand Chamber of Commerce, heart of the City,
heart Valley Chamber of Commerce,
Hamilton Central Business Association,
New Zealand Security Association, Hindu Foundation
of New Zealand, Darien, business Owners Group, N-Z-I-B-A,
and so many more.
These submissions, Mrs.
Chairman, reflect the work we put in over the last year
to connect with the retailers,
and I'm glad now
we have a voice at the decision making table.
Now we'll move to the, uh, make submissions.
Okay. Do you wanna come up, Mr. Frick?
I'm assuming you're Mr. Frick.
Um, how long, because I, we've got 10 more minutes
and I know we've got lots of questions.
So, um, I do have four minutes of prepared remarks. So
Question, well, that's gonna cut into your question time.
I really want you to, um,
if you can just summarize it quicker. Sure.
Uh, so thank you. Look, I want to start with theft in
that case, uh, before going
to citizen's arrest very quickly on theft.
This is, uh, the biggest legitimacy gap
that our justice system has with retailers.
Theft under $500 is the lowest penalty in the crimes act,
a maximum three months sentence of imprisonment.
The issue is that value thresholds in the theft defense
don't account for the cumulative harm caused
by repeat offending.
So 10 separate thefts under $500 attracts the same maximum
sentence, one three month sentence of imprisonment.
In contrast, a single theft over a thousand dollars
raise a maximum sentence of seven years.
This is an extraordinary lift in the penalty level
and does not map well onto the seriousness
of the offending clause.
26 of the bill lifts the lowest penalty, uh,
lifts the penalty for the lowest level of theft.
That's an improvement on the status quo.
Um, although it's not the best fix,
aggressive shoplifting at Clause 25 creates a new offense
that doubles the penalty where theft is accompanied
by offensive, threatening, insulting, or disorderly conduct.
This is a meaningful, there's a meaningful difference
between somebody who surreptitiously pockets an item,
and somebody who verbally views
the retail workers in the process.
The law can reasonably treat
those circumstances differently.
Finally, the infringement offense in the amendment paper.
Over the past decade, around half of all police proceedings
for theft went no further than a warning.
Warnings are absolutely appropriate in many cases,
but a financial infringement might be a more suitable
response for some low level offenders
on the citizen's arrest.
I, before I go into the substance, I want
to be very clear about what the MAG is not
and is not asking for.
We are not advocating for retailers, staff members, guards,
or members of the public put themselves in harm's way.
Full stop. What we are asking the committee
to consider is whether New Zealand law adequately protects
victims who do react in the heat of the moment,
provided that they act reasonably.
To make this concrete, consider a retailer
who finds a person stealing $800 worth
of product from their store, tells them they can't leave,
puts a hand on their shoulder and calls police.
Under current law, that person has no protection against
civil or criminal liability
because the value of goods was less than $1,000.
Every comparable jurisdiction we have reviewed protects
victims in that situation.
Every territory and state of Australia, all of Canada,
every country in the UK
and Ireland, the committee may wish
to consider whether New Zealand's current position is
appropriately calibrated by comparison.
I'd also draw the committee's attention
to the longer term implications of this.
For the security sector. Almost every retailer has a policy
directing staff not to intervene.
That won't change under this bill
and is absolutely appropriate in the vast majority of cases.
But Canada and Australia,
their legal framework has supported the development
of a greater more professionalized security industry.
Firms that are offered, uh, are able
to offer trained personnel
who can intervene appropriately when it's safe to do so.
That's underpinned by their citizens' arrest laws.
And in New Zealand, guards are limited
to a report and observe function only.
So a law change can lay the foundation for greater training,
career pathways, and higher quality service
provision across the sector.
And I would encourage the committee to consider
that long-term fixture.
Finally, on defensive property,
our concern here is straightforward.
If a retailer grabs a thief by the wrist
to stop them leaving and the thief pulls away
and they have significant bruising
or straining, that is a bodily harm.
Even though the use of force in that context was reasonable.
If our law does not allow a retailer to grab an offender
by the wrist to retake their property, it's not clear
what use of force they can actually do.
So the mag's preferred approach is
a simple objective measure.
Is the force reasonable? And was it done for the purpose
of retaking property?
It aligns, uh, with Canada's position towards 2013,
where they reformed their laws in consistent way with ours.
Importantly, this does not allow a retailer
to strike a person out of anger.
Okay. Right. I'm going to honorable Ginny Anderson.
Thank you very much. Great submission. Both, um, uh, Mr.
Koal, uh, should shop owners be able to use weapons?
And if so, could you give me an example of the type
of weapon that would be used in this legislation? So
That, that's, I'm very happy. That
Question For, that's not, that's not a part
of the, that's not what we're
Proposing. No, I'm asking
question for, so Koho Yeah,
It is mentioned that there's not part of the, uh, proposal
that we have done.
Right. But it is your proposal that you would, um,
'cause it notes in here that you,
on your submit your submission that, uh, Australia
and Canada, uh, have, we need to catch up with them.
But in Australia and Canada, they don't allow the shop owner
to strike or to use force against the offender.
So that actually makes New Zealand an outlier then. Um, so,
So Canada, No, I'm asking Mr.
Km, thank you for your submission. My question is to Mr.
Kosho, I'd like to hear from him.
Do you consider that New Zealand is now an outlier from
Canada and, uh, Australia
because we are allowing our, um, shop owners to strike
or use reasonable force?
No, we are not allowing to strike, uh, Ms. Jenny Anderson.
I think you are, there's a lot of misrepresentation, uh,
that has been, um, you know, uh, spread around.
What we are trying to do is we are trying
to bring our laws in line with Australia and Canada
and over there it was done by a bi bipartisan way.
Uh, and the sky hasn't fallen in, uh, Australia.
In Australia and in Canada, you know, the, uh,
the shop owners over there.
And that's what we are proposing here as well.
And also the security guards is that if, uh, in a heat
of the moment, if they had to, uh, act, uh, and,
and so the laws should be
backing these retailers, not the offenders.
And, uh, and we are changing those laws.
We, we, we are basically proposing that, uh,
the laws should be protecting New Zealanders every hour
of every of the day, uh, not just between certain hours.
And also, Mr. Jenny Anderson, this is not something new
that we have come up with these.
The citizen has powers is, uh,
a law in New Zealand from very, very long time,
but it has been very confusing, inconsistent,
and it's not working for today's New Zealand.
And, uh, so what it is doing is, is clarifying the law.
I know, and, and, uh, bringing in part with those countries.
Could I, I wanna get more questions.
La last question. So,
so from reading the draft legislation, it strikes out
that the part that says must not use striking.
So, so, uh, uh, it is pretty clear from reading the bill
that this would propose that shop owners are allowed
to use reasonable force, uh, against, uh,
people coming into their shop.
They think of shoplifting, the police association has just
submitted that they are concerned
that this will result in manslaughter charges being laid.
What is your response
To this? Wasn't, wasn't
police association concerned for the,
for the, uh, um, gang patch laws as well?
Right. So here we need to be sensible.
We need to, uh, see what works for New Zealand, right?
Uh, and Ms. Jean Anderson, you would be very happy to know
that in fact, in your electorate, majority
of the business owners, they have supported this proposal.
They have over boundary supported.
This one probably you have didn't get the time to speak
to your, uh, retailers over there. Okay.
I'm going to, do you wanna briefly just,
Just the point about 2013 in Canada,
they updated their defensive property laws consistently
with the way that we are doing now.
They previously had a provision that said, you cannot strike
and you cannot cause boly harm that has been removed.
We're continuing the tradition
where New Zealand law aligns with that of Canada. So
Clarify. No, no, no, no,
no, no, no, no, no, no.
I'm going to, I'm going to miss, uh, re ley.
I just wanna ask, um, look, I'm sorry for all the pain
that your family has gone through.
I know that you would've moved here believe
that New Zealand was one
of the safest countries in the world.
Can I ask you my friend, um,
what times does your shop open and close? I
Open at nine o'clock in the morning.
We taste and close, it's five 30.
So I opened my business last year in April,
and it's not even a year.
And I got hit by three times.
And so many times I shoplifters, well, they come to my store
all they say, like, because we can't do anything at the
moment because all they said they use a F word
and then they just walk out from my shop with my
belonging from my shop. You know,
I'm sorry. And so,
can I ask you, there's a lot
of talk about if we allow citizens arrest during the day,
um, you know, at night.
Um, there's different situations in people's minds,
but if we allow it during the day,
there's gonna be all these problems and,
and you might get very hurt.
Your children might be get very hurt.
How do you feel having experienced those situations?
Do you feel that you'll be able to make a decision in
that situation whether you hold down the person or not?
Not
First thing. Like, I
think it's, some have to be start from somewhere.
Once it start, like, like when the people know, okay,
this is happening in New Zealand, the law change,
I will definitely that implement, you know,
like it'll stop the retail crime
because if some young one coming to do shoplifting
or all my store and they got arrested on the spot, okay,
so when they learn the lesson, okay, this is,
the loads are changed now
and this is not gonna be easy for them to
do the things repeatedly
because the, the same group hit me three times.
So they still, they they hit you, they're still going,
still doing the same thing because they don't give up.
You know, they don't have. Okay. So I'm gonna go to Dr. Nan.
Thank you. I thank you Chair.
I've got two questions for the ministry
advisory group in general.
And also thank you so much for coming.
And we do acknowledge, um, the harm that is a lot
of these has befall on victims of retail crime.
Um, the MEC didn't recommend, uh,
recommended the age limit, which is 18
and also recommended that it kept
to things like retail crime.
But in the bill itself, it expanded to all ages Yep.
And all crimes under the thanks. Yep. Yeah.
So can I just check how, why is that different from what the
Absolutely. So, so look, um,
we've looked at every
country, every comparable country.
No country provides a different regime
for systems arrest for under eighteens.
I think it's very unrealistic to expect a
victim of crime in the moment.
As the police association said, it is hard
to determine a person's age,
and it's unrealistic to expect a retailer in the process
of being offended against determine,
or to ask somebody if they're under the age of 18.
So it's just not practical and it doesn't work.
There's no comparable jurisdiction
where we've seen that provisions in place.
And though what we'll say is
that any force use has to be reasonable.
And that will include if a person is very young, that is a,
that's an element that's going to go into whether
or not that forced disease is
reasonable in that circumstance.
So there are protections for under 18.
It's not explicit in the bill.
I guess the thing is in the, the dairy owners
and business association submission, they did say
that in the heat of the moment.
Yeah. You know, human nature happens,
but so in the heat of the moment,
people are not gonna go like, oh,
well this person clearly looks X, Y, Z.
Yeah. You know, they're going to do what? Yeah.
You Know, And I,
and I come back to what I said originally,
which is we don't want retailers
putting themselves in harm's way.
This is about protecting them
where they do react reasonably.
And so it's, it's about codifying, uh, uh,
what is the practice in every country that we've looked at
and what is the practice in New Zealand
after the hours 9:00 PM 6:00 AM
One final question is you use comparable jurisdictions in
Australia and Canada, but for example,
after the law has changed around citizens arrest,
retail crime in Australia has searched.
We're looking at the increase of 27%
in Victoria Long last year.
Canada is calling considering a national crisis.
So clearly changes to their retail crime
and citizen risk laws has not reduced
the degree of retail crime. Yeah. So what is,
Yeah, and, and as we said in our submission, I don't think
that this, this, this particular change is not about, uh,
being a magic bullet or a silver bullet.
I think that the changes that we're making on the theft
defense are going to be quite a significant contribution
because we currently have a situation where I, we went
and ta ta off until you talked to police there.
70% of the crime caused in the area was done by five
Offenders. And Mr. Khaw
said this, is this this silver bullet
for addressing retail crime? No. In your
Submission, no, we haven't said as a bullet, uh, you know,
this needs a whole package.
There's so many things are required.
You need to change trespass act.
You need to change shoplifting up, you know, need
to look at the, uh, shoplifting offenses
and of course the defensive property.
Uh, and then the, uh, fisher, there's
so many things you need to do.
You know, what we have done is we have let the problem go
out of hands for so many years.
Uh, and the culture of excuses has, uh,
taken such a long time.
Can I ask you a question, uh, Mr. Chair if, uh, if
You No, no, no, no.
I'm bringing this to a close. Right.
Hey, look, thank you very much
for your submission this morning.
Thank you for coming and ex sharing your experiences.
Um, it's been very helpful.
Right now we're going to go to the Human Rights Commission,
which is on on Zoom.
On Zoom.
Can you hear me?
Are you there? Oh, yeah. Cool.
Good morning. Uh, are you on your own
or you've got a colleague joining you?
I can't hear you, unfortunately. Can't hear you.
Okay. We've got 10 minutes.
Um, as you heard, um, people wanna ask questions,
so leave us a bit of time, please.
Thank you.
Oh, thank you. I'll, I'll begin.
Um, Koto, my name is Gail Pacheco.
I'm the Equal Employment Opportunities, uh,
commissioner at the New Zealand Human Rights Commission,
takai, Tata, uh,
and I'm joining you from the UN's 70th commission
on the status of women.
So, uh, uh, a different place in the world at the moment.
So apologize if my internet is a bit spotty
and if it does fall out, um, uh, our ce uh,
Meg Deron will take over.
Uh, so as I said, I'm at the commission status of women
where the priority theme this year is around access
to justice for women.
Uh, and as you can see, uh, alongside me,
I've got our chief executive, Meg Deron,
who is joining you from Auckland today.
Uh, so first up, the Human Rights Commission is New
Zealand's National Human Rights Institution, uh,
and the Central National Preventative Mechanism under the
optional protocol to the Convention against Torture.
Um, speaking to this bill, this bill seeks to do a range
of things, but we'll focus on just two things today.
Uh, first I'll address the amendments that relate
to slave dealing, people smuggling, and human trafficking.
So I wanna start by saying the commission strongly supports
these measures as an important step
to strengthen protections against these grave
human rights violations.
Um, these changes will lead to stronger protection
for victims by making trafficking offenses easier
to prosecute, uh, closing legal loopholes used
by traffickers and bringing the law into line
with international conventions.
Uh, it'll also send a message to perpetrators
that they do not have impunity in New Zealand.
The commission welcomes this revised defense
of trafficking in persons, which more closely aligns
with the Palermo protocol, as well as the creation
of a separate offense of trafficking a child
and clarifying that the child's consent is irrelevant
and the broadening of the term unauthorized migrant
to cover situations
where legitimate documents are used when they're being,
um, smuggled.
Um, also included in that list is an increase in maximum
penalties in dealing for dealing in slaves
and dealing in people under 18.
Collectively, these amendments address concerns previously
raised by UN treaty bodies to provide appropriate penalties
for trafficking in persons and related practices,
and adopting legislation to eliminate modern forms
of slavery and slavery like practices all in line
with international standards.
I'd like to also note
that these positive legislative changes are only one part.
So as international bodies have recommended to New Zealand
effective implementation is essential
to actually give these provisions.
Real meaning including strengthening investigations
and prosecutions of the perpetrators of trafficking, um,
early identification of victims
and referral to appropriate services
and ensuring victims are not criminalized, detained,
or punished for the exploitation they have suffered.
I'll now hand over to Meg
to address other aspects of the bill.
Thank you.
Still can't hear you. Meg,
Can you hear me now? Yeah,
Yeah. Cool.
Uh, I will focus on the proposed changes
to the citizens' arrest and defensive property powers.
Uh, I do want to acknowledge the harm expressed
by the previous submitter.
None of us want people to be unsafe in their place of work,
but I think as we've heard from array
of submitters this morning,
these changes will actually cause further harm rather than
reducing the harm he has experienced.
The commission has considered these proposals
through the lens of our core mandate to protect
and promote human rights
for all people in ALT and New Zealand.
This includes the right to be safe from violence
and safe in the spaces where people work
and move through daily life.
The proposed expansions of citizens arrest powers,
including explicit permission to use restraints
and allowing you violence
and defensive property risks causing real harm to retailers
and to those who are apprehended, taken together
with the change theft defenses these amendments risk
reinforcing a punitive path in which complex social problems
are met with greater restraint, surveillance and violence.
While ordinary workers
and young people are increasingly exposed
to harm in everyday settings,
as has been acknowledged repeatedly this morning.
Unlike police or corrections staff, members
of the public are not trained,
not regulated, and not monitored.
So this bill gives them permission to detain
and even restrain other people
without any support to really do so.
Children and young people tamari
and ran tahi, particularly Maori
and Pacific youth, who are already disproportionately
represented in enforcement actions,
will also be the most impacted.
The new theft defense is introduced despite police advice
to the Ministry of Justice, that the legislative framework
for prosecuting theft is sufficient.
We all want peaceful communities.
We all want to safely go about our lives,
but increasing the criminalization of children
and a wider range of people using violence in our
communities and against children will not make them safer.
When you take a human rights based approach.
These parts of the legislation do not stand up to scrutiny.
Firstly, they are not in step with human rights standards.
They're outta step with recommendations from the UN expert
committees on the rights of the child,
and on the committees tasked
with keeping us free from torture, krill,
and human integrating treatment of punishment.
Secondly, was there meaningful participation
and engagement on this issue
with the people most impacted by the decision?
Does the approach uphold equity and non-discrimination?
Again, the answer is no. Indeed, troublingly.
Those that were consulted was either extremely limited,
so there was no apparent consultation with iwi or hapu
or those consulted
that have over overwhelmingly indicated the
proposals are concerning.
Hospitality, New Zealand said it were considered a
significant health and safety risk to both staff
and customers for stronger detaining abilities.
Retail New Zealand has said on balance,
they do not favor security guards or retail staff
or owners having these detaining powers at this time.
There are multiple examples of these types of comments,
and Crown Law themselves have noted
that retail theft is driven by poverty and addiction.
A human rights approach must uphold the rights
of marginalized groups, which these approaches do not do.
I recognize we are running out of time chair,
so I will just say that our submission acknowledges
that Whilst there are some mitigating effects to the harm
of these, we strongly recommend that these particular harms
and particular powers do not Go ahead.
10. Alright,
Thank you for your submission.
I've got, uh, Mr. Carl Bates.
Thanks, chair. Quick question about the way you consider
human rights in this process.
Did you consider the human rights
of those people utilizing citizens arrest powers
and getting them wrong and
therefore ending up with a, uh, conviction
because the current citizens ar um,
arrest framework is too complicated?
And secondly, did you consider the human rights
of the children who we've heard from, uh, parents earlier
who are affected by the ongoing burglary, uh,
and theft and their lives?
I completely understand the question
and I can see
that whilst it's a really distressing situation
that there are people out there suffering harm from retail
crime, this will not reduce retail crime.
So for those children and young people having safer
communities doesn't look like other children being detained.
Sorry, that wasn't my question. My question was whether
or not you considered the human rights
of those two groups in the process that you went through.
Absolutely. And balancing rights always. Can you
Refer to where that Is in the process?
Balancing human rights is always the process of this.
And the analysis demonstrates this will cause greater harm.
And I think you've heard that from a range of organizations,
not just from us.
I can't find that. Alright.
Thank you for your submission to both you, uh,
particularly coming in from overseas, uh, this morning.
Thank you. Uh, now we're going to go to Thank you.
Thank you so much for your time. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Um, we're now gonna go to John
who are on, uh, zoom.
Is that right? Good morning.
Good morning, Dan, are you on your own?
I, I thought there was gonna be another person joining.
Uh, my colleague Roseanne should be joining.
I see that she's online now.
Oh good. Good morning. Hey, lovely to have you both.
We've got 10 minutes as you've probably heard.
Uh, members wanna ask questions
and we've all read your submissions.
Understood. Um, so, uh, my name's Dan Os.
I'm Deputy Chief Executive for Han St. John.
I, um, lead the delivery
of our entire ambulance service operations.
I'm joined today by Roseanne Shaw, uh, gm, um,
ambulance operations, who is one
of the two people responsible
for delivering emergency ambulance across, um, New Zealand.
I think firstly, just from a Han St.
John perspective, we would remind you that, um,
alongside Wellington Free,
we answer 700,000 triple one calls a year.
We manage over 600,000 incidents.
It's Wellington, France, and John.
Um, and as an organization, our people deal
with over half a million patients a year.
Um, it's easy to think of our people
as just being paramedics,
but actually we are privileged to be supported by a range
of volunteers from the community, um, and rural
and remote environments as well as metropolitan areas.
These are good people who are professionals,
often within their own right are giving of their time, John
and the community to support our people.
Our professional people, um, both paid
and volunteer, have been exposed to 426
incidents of some form of violence over the last year.
Um, that is face-to-face violence
and it excludes, uh, threats towards our call handlers, uh,
of rape killing, et cetera.
Um, we strongly support subpart five
of the crimes amendment bill, um,
which defines a first responder
and introduces higher penalties
for assaults on first responders.
Uh, we recognize that some people, um,
are suffering a medical condition when they behave
abnormally when we attend them.
And we believe, um, that between our people, the police
and the judiciary system,
that'll be sufficiently accounted for.
Um, and, uh, we would, uh, we also note
that whilst this is a good step forward
for first responders attending who are faced
with physical violence, um, it's not clear to us how any,
uh, protection is afforded under this bill
for our call handlers, who again, can be subject to threats
of rape, killing and violence.
Um, appreciate it might not be for this bill,
but that would be something that we would advocate
for in any future changes.
Um, Roseanne's now going to talk to you about some
of the examples that our people face in order
to underscore why this is important to us.
Thanks, Dan. Um,
I would like to say that our emergency workforce
and the volunteers, they do face unpredictable
and serious risks.
Some recent incidents to give you an, uh, examples
are unprovoked assaults on paramedics, attacks by patients
during transport attempts to break into ambulances,
um, and threats involving weapons,
which highlights the real world risks that,
that our crews are facing.
Um, some examples are a paramedic
who is king hit at Auckland Ed.
And these are just in the last three months, um,
two officers assaulted by a patient in Taranaki, both
of them needing treatment, a patient, um, attacking
with a razor and trying to break into one
of our ambulance stations.
Um, and in all of those instances,
the perpetrator has been arrested, which is great to hear.
Uh, in addition to that, we've got ramming
of gates at stations.
We've got ambulances being circled
and, um, threatened threatening behavior
to the crews inside.
And, um, more recently we've had three ambulances at a
station where, uh, their tires have been slashed,
which has meant we have been unable to respond
to a potentially life threatening call.
Um, and a young female being sexually assaulted in the back
of an ambulance by a patient.
Thanks, Dan. Back to you.
Thank you. And, um, just, just
before we take questions, I've been in the, um, position
of being the closest manager to two incidents
where our people have been assaulted in the last month.
Um, and the physical side is less
of an impact the psychosocial side, these are some
of the toughest people I know that deal with, um, things
that most of us only watch on tv
and they're fundamentally broken when they are
assaulted by a patient.
Um, and so this is exactly why we a hundred percent support
the Okay.
Good. Thank you very much.
Now, my first question, uh, Mr. Todd Stevenson.
Oh, thank you both. Um, thank you both for being here
and thank you to all your staff
and members for everything you do every day.
Just two quick questions.
Clarification, Dan or, and Roseanne, actually, how often
and those incidents you're outlining are horrific.
How often are these people that, you know,
obviously you might be turn your, you know,
your staff are turning up to deal with a particular patient.
How often are these like bystanders
or people that are just kind of on the sidelines
that are interfering?
Does that occur quite often?
Yes. Um, so, um, it happens about
probably 50% of the time.
Mm-hmm. Where, um, uh, someone's interfering.
Sometimes it's worried au sometimes it's, um, you know,
people at a pub, uh, getting in the way.
Okay. And then just one of the quick question,
'cause I think you made a really interesting point, Dan.
You call them your call handlers,
but I assume this is the 1, 1 1 staff
that are taking the calls.
Um, and that yeah. Really interesting point you make there
about obviously the abuse, the verbal abuse
that they receive.
Um, obviously may not be covered by this bill,
but I just wanted to hit acknowledge that we heard that
and I think that's also very troubling
and we can look at what can be done later.
Okay. I'm gonna have a question from Ms. Ingrid Leary.
Um, thank you for your submission
and also just acknowledging the incredible work you do
and the, uh, issues that you do face on the frontline.
I'm, I've heard reports from your workforce about, um,
calling for police assistance at certain scenarios
and being told just to call back in half an hour
or to keep them updated
and that support hasn't been there for them.
And I'm wondering if it would make a difference if there
were, uh, more police support currently
and if there were better response teams, would
that help to keep you safe?
And I'm thinking about what we are looking at here,
is the right response or law change
or is it better support for you at the front line?
Thank you. Um, uh, firstly, I would say
that every time our people are directly threatened
by violence implied
or actual police are there to support us.
Um, so that's very good. Where we have challenges is where,
um, the situation's unknown
and police are unable to identify a legislative reason
for them to respond
or an immediate safety risk to us as, as designated
by their information within the incident.
Um, and so that's an area that we always continue to work
through and we have good links with police
where we can manage that on a
day-to-day basis if we need to.
Um, like all emergency service organizations, um, uh,
we would all advocate for additional resourcing
and I'm sure, um, additional resourcing
for our police colleagues that enable,
enables a timely response for our people always, um,
would be something that of course we would support.
Okay. Last question from Mr. Tom Rutherford.
Thank you Dan, and thank you Roseanne.
My question is around the part you include in your
submission around the support
for offenses against first responders.
Uh, we heard a previous submission where a person said
that this would achieve nothing
and wouldn't actually deter people
or isn't the way to find a solution to this problem.
What would you say in response to those people
and to your very hardworking frontline staff who want
to ensure that they feel safe every
time they turn up to work?
Thank you very much. Um, I would say that, um, our people,
our, for our frontline people,
this is very, very meaningful.
Um, and, um, it's also about them feeling valued
and them feeling confident that NZ Inc is right
behind them in the work that they do.
It's a bit like, um, my, my staff teased me last year.
I went online and I did a,
a LinkedIn post post talking about, um, you know, violence
and aggression towards their ambulance people.
Um, and my people teased me
'cause they went, most people
that beat us up don't tend to be on LinkedIn boss.
Mm-hmm. Um, and they're absolutely right.
Um, and it's actually nothing about me going
and talking to people on LinkedIn about,
um, violence and aggression.
It's about my people hearing me out in public saying,
we have a zero tolerance approach
and you have my individual support to walk away.
And for our people a signal of higher offenses as a signal
that NZ Inc.
Values them, supports them,
and backs them in the work that they do.
Alright, well very good note to finish on.
Thank you both, uh,
for attending this morning and for the work that you do.
Um, thank you. We're gonna now move on
to Mr. McDonald from the Employers
and Manufacturers Association. Thank
You, Mr. Chair. Good to
see you again. Yes.
Uh, Alan McDonald, head of advocacy. Hi Tom.
Congratulations. Hi, um, head of advocacy for the EMA
and strategy and finance for my sins.
I dunno how I got that, but anyway, why the EMA, uh,
about 15% of the country's workforce work for our members
and our second largest segment within
that workforce is retail.
So, um, I'm sure you've all heard plenty about the
area I'm going to talk about.
We mainly support the thrust of the, the changes,
but we do not support the additional powers of, um,
or the additional clarification, whatever you wanna call it,
around the citizen's arrest and also the restraint piece.
The, the main opposition for that is
around actually the health
and safety regulations that apply.
So if you step in front of a potential shoplifter
or something like that, and I will give you a couple
of examples in a minute,
but that is a known risk for the employer.
So under the current law, and that may change,
but it will still be a risk if it's a known risk
to the employer, he has to manage it
and the way, the best way to manage it,
and it's quite common practice amongst many of our retailers
and we represent the largest to the smallest retailers,
is that you let them go.
You do not get in the way
and you just stay out of harm's way.
Now if, for an example, an employer failed to do that,
knowing that this is a risk of them being assaulted,
then they have broken their duty of care
to their employee under the Health and Safety Act.
So a, you're opening up that kind of prosecution.
Now I will give you those couple of examples
that I was talking about as
to why we oppose particularly the restraint piece.
Um, so a very well known retailer,
it's downtown Auckland store, their rate of theft,
if you like, or, and it's generally done by professionals,
uh, is 10 times higher the average than the rest
of their stores across the country
and five times higher than the rest of Auckland.
It's a large retail outlet. You all know it.
They are particularly targeted, uh, by a group of people
who are seeking particular colors of sports teams.
So that probably gives you some
idea of what we're talking about.
Uh, and so they come in often mob handed often might be just
one or two perpetrators, and they go
and they just clean out the
store of the colors that they want.
Their current policy is basically to let them go, um,
because they do not wanna put their staff in harm's way.
Another well, well known retailer on Point Street, um,
my daughter happened to work there in a gap year.
This is the kind of stuff you're exposing young people to.
The oldest person in
that store on staff was a 23-year-old young woman
and they ranged from about 17 to 23.
They were targeted by a group
of probably professional shoplifters.
One of the young people stood in front of one
of these shoplifters and said,
Hey, you're gonna pay for that.
She was kicked and punched to the floor
and then picked up by her hair.
And as well as losing a large chunk of her hair,
she lost part of her scalp as well.
That's the kind of risk that you are exposing people to
by asking them to get in harm's way.
If you, uh, encourage
and there, there will be a group of people
that own these stores that want to do, you know,
what they perceive as the right thing
and interfere If you do that
and you allow them to make restraint.
So a people who are trained in restraint like the police
for example, they spend months learning
how to do that properly.
Um, there's also another part of the law
that says if you feel you are unreasonably being restrained,
you may resist and use reasonable force to resist.
You can see how that's going to ramp up
because the people, particularly those often underage people
who are doing these raids
and things, they know exactly what they can and can't do.
They're well instructed when they go in.
So we're very concerned about that potential
to ramp things up on the retrain side restraints side
of stuff, oddly enough, um,
we also represent in our membership security guards.
Yeah. And they're kind of torn on this one.
There are a group that see this as a business opportunity
because they will train their staff and restraint
and be able to hire 'em out at higher rates.
That's good for them. They are also concerned
because there's a certain profile of people who apply
for security job roles.
They call 'em more cops.
So if you've ever seen Paul bla more cop,
you know what I'm talking about, right?
They feel it's their duty to rush and interfere.
Australian people, all that sort of thing.
They try and weed them out. They won't weed them all out.
So again, while it's maybe a business opportunity,
there's also some dangers associated with
that in terms of the attitude and stuff.
So that's a particular issue that's of concern for them.
So double sided, uh, sort if you like.
That's really all I want to say around the submission.
The rest, oh, we've got some questions. Yeah.
First one from Mr. Todd.
Steven. Yeah. Thank you. Thank you for your submission.
I actually wanna talk about what's not in the submission.
Yeah. Because it's actually, I, I find it a bit strange,
but I'm gonna ask you 'cause maybe
you can give feedback from your members.
Sure. Because you've got, you talk nothing
about the potential.
There's obviously penalty changes around property
and shoplifting offenses.
Yeah. You've got the idea of, uh, summary offensive fines
and then there's a new offensive aggressive shop listing.
Does your members give you any feedback on those changes?
Yeah, so as, as I said at the start,
we're largely supportive
of the rest of the content of the bill.
I just wanted to concentrate on that particular need.
I think we need to get that on the record
because it's not clear. Right.
I've, yeah, yeah. Take that as red.
Okay. So all of those things your members are happy with.
Yeah, largely. Largely.
Okay. I'm going to Mr. Tom Redford. Thanks Alan.
Um, in response to your question around not being supportive
of the citizen's arrest, what do you see
as being the solution to the issue
that we are facing at the moment?
So I see some, a lack of clarity in the current law.
Uh, so if you don't support this proposal,
what would be something that you would look to support?
Well, I think the whole applying the whole citizen's
arrest thing in these situations is in, in
and of itself, not the answer.
Um, so the current one, most people are unaware of it. Yeah.
But obviously the amount of publicity
and things that's been around the current one, the new one,
then more people will become aware
and you open the door to more people rushing in
and perhaps getting in harm's way.
So, you know, it's a, it's a power that exists.
We don't think it needs to be expanded
and it's not commonly used in these situations anyway.
And, and frankly nor should it be.
Um, so what,
what we have seen is quite a noticeable drop off in the
style of offending that sparked a lot
of the recommendations that have come outta there.
And that's, I think there's obviously an increased
police presence in some of these areas.
And that's one of the, one of the things that we need.
I think some of the safety measures that have,
have been brought in, whether it's the bollards,
the fog cannons, all those sorts of things.
And also just working with the various groups
that are affected by these on how
to deescalate deescalation.
Um, even the security guards will tell you that's,
that's always their number one priority.
It's always the number one priority of police.
And I think more could be done perhaps with some
of the people who are victims of these crimes.
And it, it's terribly unfortunate and hard on their families
and we recognize all that.
Mm-hmm. But perhaps some work around how
to deescalate these things rather than ramp them up.
Um, and just supplementary to that,
we had a gentleman in here who owns a store, uh, in the hut.
Yep. Uh, who was in tears saying he's hit
by the same group of people regularly.
He's powerless to be able to do anything.
Obviously it's sort of at a, what would be conceived
to be a petty level of crime.
Yeah. But as a store owner,
his livelihood is being impacted on a regular
basis by the same people
And did Absolutely. What
can we do, uh, aside from increased police presence?
Yeah. Aside from that, what can we do
to empower someone like him as a store owner
to protect his livelihood? So
It's the same group of people, um, facial recognition.
Mm-hmm. And it's,
it would be in his case, probably one camera.
Mm-hmm. Uh, and if you've got a record of
what they look like and who they are, then
that can go down the road to the local
station and they can sort it out. Alright,
Thank you. I'm gonna take the
last question from Dr. Sunan. Um,
Thank you so much for your submission.
You mentioned Health and Safety Act
and I was trying to find there was, I remember when I used
to look after the house and safety,
there's a specific regulations around duty of care
of A-P-C-P-U around customers, um,
or people who are within the premise in this case,
it's not just simply the workers.
If a bystander decide to intervene
and get injured on the premise of a shop as well, would
that create additional complications?
Uh, possibly.
But I think it would only ever get tested in court.
Um mm-hmm. It, yeah, you do have a duty
of care to people on your premises.
Whether that extends to somebody who has a rush of blood
and rushes and to stop shoplifter, uh,
there'd only be one test for that.
And it's, it's not the law, it's the court. Yeah.
Alright. Hey, thank you Mr. McDonald. Very helpful.
Um, and I'm drawing out some of that detail. Thank you.
Right. We've got, um, New Zealand at the back there. Right.
Cool. Um, Ms. Gray, I think, is that correct?
Hopefully you've been watching for a while.
I've seen you down there, so, um, please,
even a little bit type of person.
Okay. I will do my best.
Um, so what I wanna talk about today relates to subpart two
of the Crimes Amendment bill, which is about slight dealing
and human trafficking offenses.
So it's really interesting,
it was actually a year ago this week that I sat
before the Justice Committee when it was looking at a
private members bill that was increasing the penalties
for slavery offenses.
And that day there was just this really strong united call
from survivors and legal experts
and civil society organizations that,
and we sent a really strong message that
the provisions in the crimes act
around human trafficking really needed to be overhauled.
So it's awesome to be here a year later when you're
considering a bill that does a lot of what was asked
for a year ago.
And so at the outset, I just wanted to express my gratitude,
um, to this committee for the process of change
that has happened and for your role in that process.
Um, so it's no surprise
that TF one strongly supports the intent of subpart two
of the Crimes amendment bill.
We really welcome the clearer definitions of trafficking,
the updates that have taken place to align us
with international best standards.
Um, but I also just wanna echo what I said a year ago,
which is that good, um, penalties
and good definitions on their own just aren't enough.
A law can look really strong on paper,
but it can still fail the person
who's sitting in front of us.
When someone who's been trafficked approaches authorities in
New Zealand, they shouldn't have to ask this question,
will I be punished or will I be protected?
And that's the reality that's facing, um, many victims
of trafficking in New Zealand.
And to get to the heart of this,
I just wanna pull out two things from TF N'S submission.
So firstly, um, TFN really recommends
that there's an additional amendment made to Subpart two
and introducing a statutory non punishment defense
for victims of trafficking.
Um, so under New Zealand's current law, if as a victim
of trafficking, you commit unlawful acts, there's no sort
of automatic, um, defense if you're prosecuted for that act.
There's, um, the UN High Commissioner on Human Rights has a
bunch of guidelines and principles on human trafficking.
And this idea of non punishment is one of those principles.
And at the heart of it, it basically says,
if you are in a situation of trafficking,
if there's been coercion, if there's been deception,
then you're not committing those acts in a voluntary way.
And the reason that this is so important when it comes
to human trafficking is that a victim
of trafficking really presents in this obvious clear
cut category of a victim.
They often actually present complicit in the acts
that were committed against them,
which makes the whole situation really tricky.
So they might have worked illegally,
they might have overstayed of these,
that they might have carried drugs,
they might have used false documents,
and that means on paper they look like the problem.
But really those, um, things were done under coercion.
So I think we just need to protect victims in that respect,
because if victims fear that they're gonna be punished,
then they're not gonna come forward.
And if they don't come forward, we can't identify them.
And if we don't identify the victims,
we can't identify the traffickers.
We can't unravel it all. So that's my first point.
Non punishment. Um,
and secondly, I just wanna highlight a, a gap really.
Um, so around our victim protection.
So New Zealand doesn't have
a national referral mechanism when it comes
to victims of trafficking.
Um, you can have the best law in the world,
but it's just gonna fall short if we can't actually identify
victims of trafficking to begin with.
Um, and that's kind of our situation right now.
No formal referral mechanism.
And that means if you are someone in New Zealand that thinks
that they might be a victim of trafficking,
it's actually really hard to get help.
There's no one number to call where you know that that's,
that's gonna be handled properly.
There's not sort of a unified system that frontline agencies
can use, that they can correctly identify indicators
of trafficking and respond and refer into care.
And then there's actually not a lot of support services
for victims at all.
In fact, to my knowledge, it's just the Salvation Army
who I understand you've already heard from this morning.
So this leaves a really big gap in our response
to human trafficking.
Um, and we wanna close it because identifying victims
and protecting them is, is key.
And I want to show you this
through a quick story from one of tier fund's partners.
So tier fund works around the world
and we do anti human trafficking work across
Southeast Asia and the Pacific.
Um, and we helped a particular man in, um, Cambodia.
So he was a survivor of forced labor.
He had gone to Thailand
and he had ended up being in a situation of forced labor.
He was injured, disclosed his situation in hospital,
which was a risky thing to do
'cause he was there illegally at that point,
ended up home in Cambodia.
But he was there worse off than when he left. Right?
And that's when he came into the care of, um, Han's partner
and was identified as a victim of trafficking.
And so they were able to care for him
and they were able to give him practical supports.
They gave him healthcare, they gave him counseling,
they gave him essential items,
they helped him recover his identity documents
that he no longer had,
and they were able to set his life
on a really different trajectory.
So he said at one point he had totally lost
hope for his future.
And then now he says that he has such a positive outlook
for his life and he's got hope again.
And I guess my point is that's the outcome
that we should want for every victim
of human trafficking here in New Zealand as well.
But it's not an outcome that many get here.
And so I guess my challenge to you guys today is, is
to consider those additions
and con to consider what is sort of yet still to be done.
Fantastic. Hey, thank you.
We've got first question from Ms. Ingrid
Leary. Yeah. Um,
just acknowledging tear funds work in this space.
You have been very staunch advocates, um,
and it was great to meet your team in Auckland.
Am I hearing you correctly
and thinking that if somebody is under coercion and so on,
and this is really for clarity.
Yeah. Um, my, my sense would be if they had a good lawyer
and they could show that they didn't form means rea,
that they wouldn't be a perpetrator.
So this is more about the signal that you want to send,
that it is safe so that there's just a kind
of an active signaling in the legislation,
um, for clarity's sake. Is that the
Correct interpretation? Yeah.
Yeah. So it's like the best practice
that we can look at in terms
of international anti-trafficking law.
It's like an extra layer of protection.
Okay. Um, I presume the second aspect,
your second part doesn't actually need a legislative change.
Uh, we could set up a register,
we don't need to do legislation. Is that correct?
It can be both. And so lots of jurisdictions have like,
uh, have codified a, um, national fraud mechanism
by making it mandatory that identified victims have
to be sort of like, we have
to notify the competent authority.
So that's often what's in the legislation.
And then to actually kind of like follow on from that,
that's when you build the national referral mechanism.
Alright, thank you.
Hey, I think, um, that's been fantastic.
Thank you for your submission and thank pertinent points.
Thank you. It's great. Uh, right members we're onto handing
of the Shame back foundation, uh, Ms.
Masters. Oh you are? Thank you. Nice.
Be with us this morning. Um, we've got 10 minutes with you.
You've been watching, I've seen you at the back there,
so forward yours.
Thank you. Um, I'd like to begin by thanking the committee
for their consideration
and progress from a year ago when I sat before you
and asked for some changes.
So I see they have been made
and I'm just here today to add to that.
Good. So appreciate
Thank you.
I am here not only as an advocate,
but as someone with 16 years of childhood
sexual exploitation
and trafficking, I welcome the amendments to the subpart
of the crime amendment bill, particularly the reconstruction
of the trafficking offense in section 98 D
and the creation of a standalone child trafficking offense
offense under new section 98 D three.
These amendments matter and they matter not just
because they strengthen legal language, but
'cause the way the law defines trafficking shapes
how systems respond to children who are being exploited.
When we talk about trafficking in children,
we must be very clear about something.
Children do not consent to this because they can't.
I know this because of
what I experienced here in New Zealand.
And while this was happening to me, there was no overt force
or in the way people imagine it to look.
There weren't chains, there was not a cage,
there was no kidnapping in the dramatic sense of the word.
But what there was was manipulation, power
and control resulting in abject fear and terror.
The adults around me dictated my reality.
And as a child, I had no real understanding of
what was happening to me,
let alone the power to challenge it.
Children are conditioned to believe the adults around them.
We rely on them for survival.
We trust them because we have to.
When exploitation
and trafficking occur within those relationships of trust
and dependency, the power imbalance is absolute.
That is why the creation of a standalone
child trafficking offense under section 98 D three
is so important.
Removing the requirement to prove coercion, deception,
or abuse of vulnerability in cases involving children
reflects the reality of how trafficking actually occurs.
Because if you have to prove coercion in a child,
you've already misunderstood the power dynamic.
Children don't have the developmental capacity
to understand exploitation in the way adults do.
They don't have the ability to negotiate power with adults.
They simply cannot walk away from those
who control their lives.
A child cannot be held accountable for
what an adult is doing to them.
Alongside that, I also strongly support the clarification
that consent is not a defense in child trafficking cases.
Now New Zealand law already recognizes
that children cannot consent to sexual activity
by setting the consent age at 16.
These amendments to section 98 D appropriately align with
that principle by recognizing children can't consent
to exploitation, let alone trafficking.
This safeguard is critical
because without it, we risk slipping back into narratives
that shift the responsibility back onto the child, asking
what the child did, how they behaved, why they didn't leave.
Survivors hear those questions all the time,
but the truth is that children do not stay
because they want to.
They stay because they have no choice.
They are children, especially when their own family are
complicit in the trafficking
or are the traffickers themselves.
They stay also
because they're controlled, conditioned, afraid, dependent,
or simply too young to understand the reality
of what is occurring.
Trafficking often thrives in silence, secrecy, and shame.
In a situation where a child has nowhere else to turn,
the bill's clarification that it is irrelevant.
Where the exploitation ultimately occurs
is also significant.
Trafficking is about intent
and the risk of harm waiting for exploitation
to be be completed
before accountability would mean waiting until
after the damage is done.
Children should not have to endure the full extent
of exploitation
before the law recognizes that a crime has taken place
and the harm does not end when the exploitation ends.
The impact of child trafficking casts the shadow.
The length of a lifetime trauma experienced in childhood
changes the trajectory of a person's life.
It affects neurological development, mental health,
relationships, identity,
and a person's sense of safety in the world.
If your compass has been broken, it's beyond challenging
to navigate healthy relationships.
You do not simply move on from exploitation
experienced as a child.
For many survivors, recovery is a lifelong work.
That is why implementation matters just as much
as legislative reform.
Strong laws are important,
but they only make a difference if the systems around them
understand how to identify
and support children who are being exploited.
Children who are trafficked are often not
immediately recognized as victims.
They may be misidentified as offenders,
runaways, or troubled youth.
Sometimes they're criminalized for behaviors
that are actually a direct consequence
of their exploitation.
A truly survivor-centered response means ensuring
that victims survivors are not punished for
what was done to them.
Protection and support should not depend on whether a
survivor was ready
or able to cooperate with law enforcement enforce.
Many survivors are too afraid to speak immediately.
Some are still under the control of their traffickers.
Others may take years to feel safe enough to disclose.
If access to support is conditional on participation in the
justice system, many survivors will never
speak or come forward.
Trafficking reform must
therefore operate within a child centered framework
with the best interests of the child are treated
as a primary consideration, not secondary to immigration
status, not secondary to prosecution strategy,
and not secondary to administrative convenience.
It also means ensuring that frontline professionals,
including police, child protection agencies
and community services, are trained to
recognize the realities of exploitation and trafficking.
Without that understanding, children can
and do fall through the cracks.
Survivor centered justice means safety first healing.
First belief first.
When I was a child, what I needed was simple.
Someone to see me, someone to stand beside me
and someone to believe me.
For many survivors,
the most profound harm was not only the abuse,
but the, the silence that surrounded it.
After that, the shame that was placed on us, the sense
that no one would believe us.
The work of handing the shame back is about changing
that narrative, returning responsibility
and shame to the perpetrators where it belongs.
And preventing child sexual exploitation and trafficking
because it is preventable.
These amendments to Section 98 D
of the Crimes Act represent an important
and welcome step towards that.
But their success will depend on
how they're implemented in practice.
Whether systems recognize exploitation early,
whether survivors are supported rather than punished,
and whether children are believed when they speak for,
show us what is happening.
No child should ever carry the shame of
what was done to them.
In conclusion, because I am going to conclude,
children are our next generation and our future society.
Trafficking of children does occur in New Zealand.
And as a country we must do more to protect them.
A change in legislation will go a long way
to protecting our most vulnerable
and will hold those perpetrators
to account without them being able to raise legal defenses,
which no child could understand.
That is why implementing changes to section 98 D is a must
and why I'm sitting in front of you today.
Thank you so much for the opportunity to speak to you.
Hey, um, first of all, thank you for coming, um,
and bringing those firsthand experiences.
Can I just ask just some more general point?
Most New Zealanders, um, if you ask them does
exploitation and trafficking place.
Most people, I would think would have a view that's
pretty limited, but your organization, can you,
have you got any sort of insights on how prevalent this is
as an issue or I know any case is bad, don't I?
But I'm just trying to get an understanding from you as,
as a survivor of Yes.
Of what you think is the scale of the problem.
Yes. I think it's a lot bigger than people realize here in
New Zealand, and I think it's partly
because there's that cognitive dissonance.
People turn away because ethics, morals
and values don't align with that.
It's a horrible thing to consider.
But we know the Lancet, which is a renowned medical Yeah.
Um, journal over in, uh,
the States did some study on this across 200 countries
and found that New Zealand had children, girls between 12
and 16 years of age, 30% of them were sexually abused
and boys between same age,
but one in five of them would be sexually abused.
And we know this is very, very common,
but unfortunately to this day, if you put an adult
and a child in front of other adults
and say this is occurring, most adults tend
to believe the adult.
Yeah. But I guess the point is we've gotta stop
expecting children to use words.
That's their, not their primary language.
Their language is behavior. Yeah.
Okay. Right. Um, Dr. Nan,
Thank you. Um, thank
you so much for that submission.
Um, now in terms of this particular area,
obviously earlier in the, in last year,
there was the changes, quite quick changes to adoption rules
because we noticed that there is some issues with the way
that, uh, childrens are being adopted overseas, for example.
I guess my question is, is there a particular sector
that you think, or particular area that I think
that parliament or government should be being a closer eye
on that are particularly hot areas that
could have a higher possibility of child trafficking?
Unfortunately not.
What we're understanding
to be true is this is across all sectors.
Um, all creeds, all races, all hierarchy.
And I think at, at the moment
what we are noticing within the US A is
that this is everywhere.
Uh, so no, I can't give you that answer. Okay.
That's helpful though. Thank you. Thank you,
Thank you. Hey, thank
you very much this morning, uh,
for your very thoughtful submission. Thank
You. Thank
You. Right. Um,
we've got New Zealand Council
of Trade Unions, uh, by Zoom.
We have a very full day of submissions.
It take us up to two o'clock.
Um, so, uh, if you're watching, uh,
we are here from eight to two today.
So getting your money's worth. Getting your money's worth.
Hey, good morning to you both.
Uh, we've got 10 minutes with you. Uh, floor is yours.
Um, oh, Kilda, um,
call Rachel McIntosh Ajo. Can you hear me?
Yep. Um, I'm the Vice President
of the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions to Khi
and with me is Jack Foster policy Analyst at the CTU.
So we represent 32 affiliated trade unions
and more than 340,000 union members working people.
So we are the one of the largest democratic
organizations in the country.
We do welcome the opportunity to submit on this bill
and, uh, acknowledge the work of the Sub Select committee
and your support staff.
Our submission focuses on the health
and safety implications of the proposed changes
to citizens arrest and def defense of property provisions.
We do not have comments on other aspects of the bill, so we
strongly oppose the proposed changes to citizens arrest
and defensive property provisions in this bill.
We believe that this is a misguided approach
to retail crime.
It contradicts good health and safety practices
and will put working people in danger
undermining their right to a safe and healthy workplace.
And it also risks, um, the safety of alleged offenders
and the wider public.
Um, I'm gonna pass now to my colleague Jack Foster,
who will provide some further detail.
Tina Co. So thanks
for the opportunity to speak to this bill.
Um, so I'll raise three specific concerns, um, that,
that bill on that central point made by, um, Rachel.
So the first is that the citizen's arrest
and entertainment changes, uh, made in the bill, uh,
conflict with the Health and Safety at Work Act 2015.
So under that act, all businesses have a statutory duty
to eliminate or minimize risks to worker health and safety.
Um, and the changes in this bill contradict that duty
by expanding powers to confront alleged shoplifters.
So this is a situation that carries a high risk of violence
and threatens the safety of staff, customers,
and the alleged offenders, particularly in retail
and hospitality industries.
So confronting shoplifters,
shoplifters in this way can directly
and dangerously escalate the situation.
This is especially the case given
that most workers are not trained in how to safely engage
with alleged offenders.
There's also the additional risk, we believe
that if this bill is passed into law, uh,
potential shoplifters, if these would come prepared
for confrontations and may arm themselves with weapons,
so it makes, um,
potentially makes the situation even more dangerous.
So the, we believe this puts hundreds
of thousands of workers at risk.
So there's an estimated 220,000 people working in retail
trade and 175,000 people working in hospitality,
the industries that would be, um, most affected.
Uh, the second point is that these changes risk increasing
pressure on workers to put themselves in harm's way.
So the inherent imbalance of power between workers
and their employers is a further risk factor that we, um,
would like the select committee to consider here.
So most employers want to do right by their employees,
but we are concerned this provision will enable some
employers to pressure workers into performing citizens
arrest procedures, putting them directly in harm's way.
So this pressure could be indirect.
For example, if someone feels insecure in their job,
they may feel compelled to intervene,
or it could be direct, for example, if a worker was informed
by their boss that they're expected
to intervene in a shoplifting situation.
And the third thing we'd like to draw your attention to is,
um, our concerns
around the potential interactions, uh, with these changes.
Um, and with the proposed health
and safety at work amendment bill, that is, um, also
before select committee at the moment.
Uh, so the health
and Safety work amendment bill, one of the changes
that makes, um, is that it reduces health
and safety requirements for small businesses.
So businesses, um, with fewer than 20 employees,
requiring them to only focus on critical risk.
So if the, if the Crimes Act, um, legislation's passed, um,
the, the with the citizen's arrest
and, um, detainment provisions, workers
and small businesses may therefore lack adequate health
and safety procedures to deal with the real hazards
that confrontations with alleged shoplifters might create.
And this includes risks to psychosocial wellbeing.
Uh, in addition, workers in smaller businesses can be more
exposed to the inherent imbalances
of power in the workplace due to their close proximity
to management and the nature of their employment.
Uh, for example, the high prevalence of casual and,
and secure work in small businesses.
So this can make, make it so
that workers feel less empowered
to speak up on matters of health and safety.
We've got two, two questions. So, um,
So as I've nearly done, yeah.
Um, just to note, you're, um, around,
there are over 12,000 small retail businesses, um, with
around 61,000 workers in New Zealand
and approximately 13,000 hospitality businesses,
small hospitality businesses with around 83,000 workers.
So this is a significant worth force that is, uh,
potentially impacted here.
Uh, so to conclude, it's clear to us
that any potential savings, uh,
to property from these changes to citizens arrest
and restraint provisions are outweighed
by the increased risks, these changes introduced to workers
and the general public, uh,
through greater workplace violence injury
and harm to livelihoods.
So we reiterate our recommendation that this aspect
of the bill does not proceed.
Alright, cool. Thank you for that.
Now, first question from Mr. Todd Stevenson.
Yeah, thank you Jack and Rachel.
And I think your submission's pretty
clear on the issues you covered.
I and you kind of just actually, yeah,
I just wanna give you opportunity because your,
your submission's very definitive at paragraph two.
You say the CTU opposes the bill.
The committee should not recommend that this bill proceeds.
Obviously this bill deals with a whole lot
of other things including, um, you know, changes
to slavery offenses.
We've got first responder offenses, got, uh, changes in, uh,
retail crime, um, penalties and summary offenses.
I just want you to be, again,
I think you said Rachel at the start,
you didn't comment on those, but I just want,
I just wanna give you the opportunity maybe
to nuance your answer
because I'm assuming your, your members
or the CTU wouldn't be opposed to some of the changes
around slavery offenses
and maybe some of these other things.
Yeah. Uh, yeah, thank you for that clarification.
Yeah, that's correct. We're just, um, it should be, uh,
read, read as just this, um, the provisions relating
to citizens arrest should not proceed. Alright,
Cool. Thank you. Now
we've got Dr. Nan,
Uh, thank you chair. Thank
you for your submission.
Uh, my question is, I mean, as we heard from some
of the submitters as well, the, the violence
and also the, the victims of retail crime is real.
Um, but I wanted to check with you if it's not this,
what do you suggest is an alternative for us
to address the issue of retail crime?
Yeah, thank you for that question. So yeah, we, um,
certainly wouldn't wanna minimize the, um, the real harm
that is done and, um,
and we think it is a serious issue that requires attention.
I think to that point, um, there's, there's two,
two things we'd like to say over the short term.
Uh, there's, uh, greater resourcing of, um,
community policing
and also, um, things like deescalation training for workers.
But over the longer term, the real issues are systemic.
So it's the roots of crime, which, uh, we know are poverty,
socioeconomic deprivation.
So if we want to tackle, um, retail crime, well the best way
to do that over the long term is to work to eliminate, um,
poverty and inequality in, um, in New Zealand society.
Uh, that requires a large cross government program of work.
It's not easy to do, it's a, it's a long, um, it'll be a,
a long road, but that is what means, uh, that's
what getting serious on crime means.
Okay, thank you. Hopefully a brief question from
Ms. Ingrid Leary.
We've seen that women are often at the, um, hard end
of changes to employment situations.
What do you see as the gendered element of this in terms
of the impact it would have on women's employment
opportunities or the conditions at work?
Excuse ma'am. Yeah, that's a great point.
Um, and so we would expect, uh,
the citizens' arrest provisions to,
to disproportionately negatively impact, um, women, um,
for the, um, for the reasons that it exposes them
to increased risk of violence. Okay.
Alright. Hey, thank you to both of you this morning
for your submission, um, for being very helpful.
Right now we've got Are you,
you're coming up here, aren't you?
Yeah. Cool. Uh, we have, um, Ms, uh,
clear, uh, from the, uh, man,
um, organization.
Thank you. We've got 10 minutes, you know what the drug is.
Any your questions.
Ahmad, the children's commissioner
and the independent statutory advocate
for all children in New Zealand under the age of 18
and all children and young people under the age of 25
who have been in or who are in our state care and
or custody system.
As always, when I'm discussing proposed legislation
with this select committee
and with other committees of the parliament,
my focus today is on the rights of ana children
and young people and how this bill will either advance
or undermine their rights.
I want to make it absolutely clear at the outset
of our discussion this morning.
I want all children in our communities
to be growing up safe.
That is one of their most basic rights under the un
conviction on the rights of the child.
I also want to acknowledge the victims
of retail theft in our communities
and the need for them to be appropriately wrapped around
and supported as outlined in my written submission
that you have already received.
My position as children's commissioner on this bill is
as follows, I strongly oppose the citizen's arrest use
of force and retail theft provisions in parts one
and six of the bill.
I have significant concerns about the coward punch in first
responder offenses in sub subparts four
and five, particularly their inclusion in the street three
strikes, uh, regime under Schedule one AB
I support strongly the child trafficking amendments
and subpart two of the bill.
I note that several provisions
of this bill will have a disproportionately harmful effect
on ana, particularly on Ana Maori and Ana Pacifica.
I too, as I said, want all our communities
to be safe places at all times,
and this is especially important for Ana.
However, I note that some
of the proposals in this bill are without evidence
that they will improve public safety.
This is concerning to me when matters of such consequence
of being considered that will have a direct
impact on children.
With my time today, I'm going to spend the majority
of it honing in on the citizen's arrest aspect given my very
significant concerns about this proposal.
However, I do encourage the committee to attend
to the other points raised in my submission,
both the aspects I oppose on children's rights grounds
and those that I support.
For example, I strongly advocate to you that the amendments
and subpart two of the bill are passed without delay given
the protective effect that they will have form Ana
who are victims of child trafficking and exploitation.
The amendments outlined in subpart two
of the bill bring New Zealand law into alignment
with our international obligations under the Palermo
protocol to prevent suppressed and punished trafficking
and persons, especially women and children.
This is a really good thing, a very positive step forward
for our law in New Zealand on children's rights.
On the other hand, turning to my significant concerns about
the proposals in this bill about citizens arrest, use
of force and retail theft, I oppose these proposals
because of their harmful effect for children.
I don't think that they will make children safer in retail
environments either, and in fact they could cause more harm.
I'm strongly advocating to you
that these provisions must not proceed
and they should be removed from this bill.
Citizens arrest is never appropriate for children.
The power to arrest is highly restricted for good reasons.
It involves an inherent exercise of power
and it involves risks of things going wrong
when children are involved.
These risks are heightened
under the UN convention on the rights of the child.
Children have the right to be free from violence,
degrading treatment in arbitrary
deprivation of their liberty.
The bill removes safeguards from sections 35 to 41
of the Crimes Act and extends what has been a state power
to untrained civilians with no age protections,
no training requirements, and no oversight.
This is not the right direction for our law
to be moving in New Zealand.
If we are serious about advancing children's rights.
If trained police officers are still in some instances
getting it wrong when it comes to arrest
and use of force on children,
then there is absolutely no basis to expect
that untrained civilians are going to do better.
In reality, what Citizens Arrests will mean
for children is a heightened risk
to their rights and safety.
And I'm very concerned about that, especially so for
also for our Pacific Amana in our communities.
Both of these groups have repeatedly told me about the
racism that they experience in our communities
and the very negative impacts
that this is having on their lives.
I acknowledge that the most common youth offense, um,
is theft 34% of all youth proceedings.
But it's crucial to look at what the underlying drivers
of why children do this, um, are
put simply the drivers are poverty
and unmet needs for children.
Evidence and research clearly shows this
a child's mistake does not warrant breaching their rights
or safety in return.
It sends the wrong message.
It is inconsistent
with New Zealand's obligations under the UN Convention on
the rights of the child, Maori and Pacific Una.
They're already overrepresented in our justice system
because of the underlying drivers that I have mentioned.
I'm very concerned about the impact
of these proposals if they were to proceed
to make this overrepresentation worse
because of the factors of racism, discrimination, and bias.
The UN committee on the rights of the child has clearly said
that states parties to the convention are required
to enact legislation
and ensure practices
that safeguard children's rights from the moment of contact
with the system, including at the stopping warning
or arrest stage.
And the committee anticipates
that only law enforcement officers will have powers
to arrest and detain children.
And that this power will only be used in conformity
with the law as a measure of last resort
and for the shortest possible period of time.
I am concerned that the proposals in this bill go against
these expectations and these duties on New Zealand.
I also note the high number of children
and young people who work in retail in New Zealand.
Um, a quarter of retail staff over a quarter,
in fact are age between 15 to 24 in New Zealand.
By placing the expectation
of undertaking citizens arrests onto children
and young people working in retail,
these proposals open them up to unacceptable risks
to their health and safety.
And I note that retail in New Zealand has strongly imposed
these proposals on those grounds.
Put simply this bill harms children on both
sides of the counter.
So I advocate to this committee
to remove the citizen's arrest
and use of force amendments entirely.
If this committee does recommend
that these proposals proceed, I implore you
to exclude their application to children.
That is anyone in our country under the age of 18.
Right? We're running outta time I think Mr. Todd.
Oh, thank, thank you for being here.
I mean, we've heard this morning,
obviously retail crime's a massive problem, right?
It it estimated like $1.4 billion annually in your own
evidence, which I actually highlight
and you've talked about is we've obviously
the most common offense of young people under 18 is theft.
Um, and I accept, you know, you said 34%.
Um, and I accept that there's these underlying drivers,
but those underlying drivers aren't the fault
of the retailer that these young people are
committing the offense against.
You'd accept that,
Of course. They're not
the
Retailer. No, that's good. No, no. So
then I
just wanted to dial dive in.
I mean, some of the other things we've been hearing about is
maybe there should be a different kind of offense regime.
Obviously this bill looks at penalties,
but do you think it'd be more appropriate maybe
to have some kind of fine system
or something that um, might try to deal
with these like basically recognize these young people have
done wrong, um, but maybe try
and deal with it in a, in a more proportionate way so
that we can actually try to address this behavior?
'cause it's a serious problem as your own evidence
outlines. So
Let's be clear.
Um, crime has been trending downwards.
The most recent data clearly shows
that that's very positive.
I am pleased about that.
Um, in terms of approaches that I think would, would work
and be more proportionate, I do think that, um, we need
to focus in on that prevention space.
All of the evidence shows that if we focus on prevention,
that is where we are going to actually, um, see
the big system changes that we need to see in this space.
Um, I agree always there must be accountability, um,
when these types of situations occur.
We need to remember though, that these are children
that we are talking about
and that accountability needs to be proportionate
and must wrap
around children in a preventative rehabilitative way,
because ultimately I think we can all agree we want children
and young people to be on a positive pathway
where they're not taking these actions.
We are not in, they're not in situations where they're
Resorting. Totally agree.
I think prevention totally good.
But would it concern you last supplementary?
That's one, because we actually heard this this morning.
We had a retailer and he, the same group
of young people had hit his store at least three times.
Um, you know, would, would it concern you
that we aren't then getting the intervention right to try
and then stop that behavior?
I'm very clear that I don't think at the moment in
New Zealand we are doing enough when it comes to
that prevention work.
Um, I don't want to see those young people taking those
actions on a repeated basis.
Um, we need to actually be sitting
with them understanding the reasons why they are making
those mistakes, uh, and working closely with them.
Um, and also I think in terms
of situations like the one you raise, that rehabilitation
and trauma informed approach
that actually involves everyone in the community, um,
to grow that sense of understanding, uh,
but also to take actions
that are gonna prevent this in the future from occurring is
very, very important.
Alright. Keeping children at the center.
Alright. Hey, thank you for coming this morning,
uh, being very helpful.
Um, thank you. Right now we are going
to Andrew Riddell, who's on Zoom.
I see him lining up there. Mr.
Riddell, we've got five minutes with you.
Um, so use your time wisely. Thank you.
Okay. Um, Kiara, I hope it's sort
of a bit finer down there than it is overcast in total
And rain. Yes. I
dunno,
we've been locked up since eight o'clock, so we don't know.
We've, we've sucked a, um, depression down from up north.
Um, now the children's commissioner
covered a lot of the sort of points that I'm, a lot
of the areas that I'm making as did, um, the, um,
CTU spokesman who was just
before that when I, when I logged in.
Um, particularly talking about, I think the, um,
we need to think about the long term drivers, the poverty
and the inequality and so forth.
Um, that is behind a lot of this, a lot, a lot of the, the,
um, shoplifting and so forth.
Aside from when you're young, you've sort
of gotta learn a few things about life
and try a few things out.
Um, well, my main concern, uh, so
therefore I think they've covered a lot of the,
a lot of what's in my submission.
I do actually include a extract from the human rights
commissioner also pointing out that the, um, um,
expanding the citizen's arrest and allowing for the physical
or mechanical constraint and, um, preventing escape
and defending property and being able to strike people
and things like that are all breaches
of human rights potentially.
My other concern, my other concern is
that those clauses quickly expanding the citizen's,
citizens' arrest rights will encourage vigilante actions
and assault and attention of innocent people, um,
with relative impunity.
The one, um, safeguard is the requirement
to ring a constable or ring the police sometime
after the event and get some advice,
but that might be too late.
Um, one example I can think of myself is I am claustrophobic
and therefore would be really adversely affected if someone
decided to lock me in a room. Yeah, we don't,
Can't do it. Okay.
Can I ask you a question?
Yep. Why do you think it'll lead
to exception of vigilantes?
Why would retailers
or whatever want to set up vigilante groups? Well,
I, I was, well aside from the fact that I, I do know of,
um, having, uh, my stepson was subject
to a vigilante group some number of years ago, being told
A retail one by No retail.
I'm not retail. I'm not talking about retail vigilantes.
I'm, I'm actually, what I've got in mind,
what really worries me is the behavior of the likes
of Brian Tamaki.
He thinks he, you know, like,
and the, uh, invasion of a, of a, um, library
that was giving a talk to kids.
This is in the, Well they,
and this is this sort of, this sort of legislation
to me just gives them the, the potential
to then say you're all under arrest. Okay.
Citizen Arrest and detentions.
Okay. I've got Mr. Carl Bates as well.
Thanks chair. Uh, and thanks Andrew for your submission
and I appreciate your example about claustrophobia.
I've got someone in my family who suffers from it, um,
badly as well.
But my concern is when we start talking about things like
citizens arrest and our concern is whether
or not the individual who, uh,
is being detained is claustrophobic,
isn't the simple answer.
Don't get yourself into a situation where you are, um,
in a position that it would be appropriate for someone
to put you under citizen's arrest in the first place.
Like, why isn't it more of a concern about the sort
of circumstance we heard earlier today from the
dairy owner who's having to sleep on the floor
in their dairy or in their store
because they're being hit multiple times.
Like, why are we so worried about whether
or not someone's claustrophobic when their option is not
to do this theft in the first place?
So what about when the person doesn't do a theft
and is incorrectly, um, accused?
Well then the person undertaking it would be, would,
would be held accountable.
What I put in my submission on this particular point,
it is detention of innocent members of the public.
It's not as if, um, everybody who was arrested
by the police even is always guilty.
A number of them will be innocent
and do, do, um, shopkeepers or anybody.
'cause I think it's a much wider issue than shopkeepers in
your, um, focusing on
one particular aspect, albeit a big problem.
But one particular aspect, their judgment may be at fault.
They may not get the right person if they do not get the
right person under this legislation.
That right person is being unduly suffered on.
Okay. No, no, no. Hey, thank you Mr. Adell.
Sorry, we've, uh, well over time,
but thank you for your submission this morning and uh, nice.
I can see you've got a nice view out the window, so.
Alright. Hey, cool. Uh, thank you.
Now we've got, uh, professor Finn who is joining us by Zoom.
Is that right? Yes. Professor, are you there?
Yes, I hope so. Hope you can hear me.
Cool. Uh, we've got another five minutes.
Um, difficult to keep the five minutes,
but anyway, let's go. Yeah.
Um, unlike, uh, the previous submitters, um,
I'm really concerned here
with some tech more technical issues which don't appear
to have been appreciated by the people preparing this bill.
The first, and it touches particularly on the citizen's
arrest provision, is
that there is an existing provision section 316
of the Crimes Act, which requires anybody making an arrest
to inform the person of the reason for the arrest
and ensure that they are brought
before the courts as soon as possible.
Now, it appears that the proposals of this bill, part
of the bill didn't actually know that that section existed
because they don't refer to it
and they say simply, um, advise the police.
Now, the problem is that the police may not be able
to respond for some considerable time,
particularly if you are in a rural
area or the police are busy.
So we are going to have people who are not being brought
to the courts as quickly as they could, as they should be,
and who certainly may not have been validly arrested
because the person has mistaken
what they think the correct offense is.
That's important because if you've been arrested
for something which couldn't possibly be right,
then it's an illegal detention
and you can use reasonable force to free yourself.
So, for example, if a person is arrested in the shop
after threat in the shopkeeper
and charged with burglary, they can say, I'm not a burglar.
The onus is then on the person
making the arrest to get it right.
Now, you know, that's not problematic, but in itself,
but it opens the door for a lot of problems
and increased violence if people think they're being accused
of the wrong, um, response.
And that's an area that the committee should I submit,
take advice on.
They should also take some advice, I think, on the defense
of property provisions
or simply can the changes that are completely intended.
It is not at the moment we have, we've had for 150 years.
A very simple rule, you cannot strike
or do bodily harm to retain property.
That is because this integrity
of the person trumps the property rights
saying you can defend with reasonable force risks,
inconsistency on what's used
and the possibility of very serious injury.
If somebody decides that they can hit an intruder
with a baseball bat, they may kill them.
Now, we would not say killing somebody over, um, some vapes
or cigarettes is a valid action at any time.
Let's not risk that you get clear guidance
for the people who are doing it.
If it's don't strike, don't hit, um, don't do bodily harm.
There is no good reason given in the papers that I can see
for changing that rule.
Then there's the point which I address in written part seven
of the submission, what I call the witch offense problem.
This is very technical one,
because if you charge somebody with offense, A
and it could instead be offense.
B, the law as it stands says you can't convict of either.
So if we've got different forms of theft,
and we'll have the same problem
with different forms of manslaughter.
If the trier of fact can't decide beyond reasonable doubt
that it was offense A as opposed to offense B, they have
to acquit of each of them.
And that's a fairly perverse outcome
and I suggest that the committee take advice on that
and how to avoid it.
Um, I also raise as a matter the, um, proposed
infringement regime.
The particularly focusing on the question of what is meant
by retail premises, for instance, is all
of them all a retail premise or is only the particular shop?
Um, this affects the rights of people
to make citizens arrest because whether
or not the offense is over, um, and
therefore whether subsequent handling of of property is, um,
receiving rather than theft.
It's simple enough fix,
but I suggest that the committee needs
to make sure that it is fixed.
So with that very rushed thing, if there's time,
I'll answer any questions that people may have.
Thank you. First question from Dr. Nan.
Thank you Chair. Um, thank you for that submission.
Uh, professor Finn, can I just ask,
'cause your submission around the interaction
between the citizen's arrest
and section 3 1 6 was an interesting one
because in general, on the borough
and section one, so 3 1 6, when the police makes the arrest,
you also need to state the person's rights
and their rights to silence and detained
and rights to a lawyer, et cetera.
Do you expect a citizen's arrest to have
to do the same thing?
And in which case, what resources is needed, for example,
even to educate people on listing those rights?
Because it could get into potential legal challenges, uh,
and problems if the list of rights even okay.
Is not declared correctly?
The short answer is it's not required at present
because the citizen's arrest, um, is a matter
of private action.
It isn't the person making the arrest is not an agent
of the state and the Bill
of Rights Act provisions don't apply.
Okay? If they're called on by the police to make,
to assist in making an arrest, they probably are agents
of the state, but then the policeman is there
to give that, that warning.
Um, as it stands,
the citizen's arrest person makes
a judgment of what they do.
And if they're wrong, um, that will be called,
if the evidence is improperly obtained, for instance,
a person's been beaten
after to make a confession,
then the courts have general discretion
to throw the evidence out.
Okay, Thank you. Thank you very much, professor.
Those, both, those clauses
3, 1, 9, 1 7, 1, uh, very helpful.
We'll be turning our minds to that.
But thank you again as usual
for your high quality submission. Thank
You. Thank you for the
opportunity.
We are going to the New Zealand Indian Central
Association, uh, by Zoom.
Good morning. We're still morning.
Um, now we've got 10 minutes with you.
So as you've probably seen, we like to ask questions.
Good morning. Is it, is it my turn? Good
Morning. Yeah, yeah, definitely,
definitely. Mr. Ka. Thank you.
Thank you. Basically, um,
I am representing the New Zealand Indian
Central Association.
We are a hundred years in New Zealand.
We have got branches all across the country,
and we have got nearly, uh, thousands of, uh, these,
uh, dairy owners who are basically the most
affected people by these small burglaries that we feel, uh,
uh, the reason why we support
anything happening is there's an inertia.
We want that inertia to be broken.
How, if this is a step, we may not agree
as an association with the, uh, the way it is being, uh,
shown, but we do want that
because the current system is not working.
We want something to change. Can I give a quick example?
Yes. The, the example is we have one of our,
our centers in Monica, close to Otra.
We had a, a van, new newly purchased van.
This van was taken by a burglar
or thief,
and within first, uh, two months it was taken away.
Police managed to catch hold of this person
because we helped him with the CCTVs and all that.
After the police has taken him, it took another six months
for the code to bring that person to the court room.
The person's, uh, lawyer advised him to confess
because he had taken the van.
So he agreed, yes, I have taken the van
and it cost us nearly $75,000 to purchase that.
The judge, after going through whatever they had to do,
keep it brief, decided
that this person's mental status was not, uh, perfect,
and he should report to some psychiatrist
after every three weeks.
And the code, that was the closure of that case.
So when we asked the police, where is our van?
It is now two years, nobody talks about our van.
So we didn't get the van.
The person keeps the van
and, uh, he's to report to some psychiatrist
after every three weeks.
I don't know whether he does it even go there or not.
If this is the system, we are not in Timbuktu.
We are in one of the most, uh, I'll say beautiful countries
of the world where we call ourselves first world.
But what is this law?
And when we called police that, hey, they said, oh,
reparations, uh, they asked each other, did we bring that up
so I can send that in writing about this case?
This is an example.
What I'm seeing, there is a feeling that nothing happens
in case somebody does these things.
So in our opinion, when we talking about some bill
to empower people
or to do something,
all we are seeing is a change from the current status.
The current status is no good leaving it there.
Uh, how,
because there's lots of lack of information,
what a person can do
about the citizen's arrest and all that.
What will be the, uh, measure that they have done it rightly
or they have exceeded the force
that they were supposed to put in.
I think, uh, these are a bit, uh, very vague things
and I would never like, uh, policing to be done
by individuals.
At the same time, if individuals are pushed,
they should have some followers,
but again, commensurate with the situation.
Alright. Hey, thank you very much. Um, we got Ms.
Na Naima.
Um, I, I just must see you again.
I just wanna ask you, so I was listening to other people,
um, talking about, you know, how will people know what the,
what the, um, restrictions are
or what they're allowed to do, et cetera.
And I just thought of organizations like yourself.
Um, would you be monitoring the progress of this,
of this bill and then, um, whatever is decided.
Do you envisage sending out an email to all your members
and, and, um, the many thousands of people that are part
of your organization saying, informing them
what the changes are
because Yes, essentially, I think that's one way
to get the word across, especially
to our migrant communities.
I think we, the teachers need to be taught first.
Before I can open my mouth to the ordinary dairy owner,
I need to be convinced what is being said is workable, so
that then I can preach
and tell them, yep, this is one
of the solutions coming up right now.
There is a bit of vagueness in it,
and I think we need to get that right.
All right. Hey, thank you very much
and thank you for your contribution this morning.
Great. Thank you. Right.
Um, we've got, uh, Mr. Cox from Business New Zealand, 10
Minutes. Thank you, chairman.
Um, I, I think I can be brief.
Uh, uh, our submission was quite brief as well.
Um, our focus is on the aspects of the bill that, uh, relate
to, uh, retail crime.
Um, we probably, many of us have heard the estimate that,
uh, retail crime costs $2.6 billion a year.
Um, that's actually just a partial estimate
because it excludes, uh, um, several, uh, costs, cost, uh,
areas including things like, uh,
financial stress placed on households,
because households actually bear the, the, the cost
of retail crime in the end, it, um, it, uh,
ignores the ongoing trauma that, uh, employees
and, uh, business owners can suffer from having been victims
of crime, and it, uh, can, uh, affect the, uh, vitality of,
uh, shopping neighborhoods.
But whatever the true cost is, uh, business New Zealand, um,
believes that, um, more measures to, uh, reduce,
uh, retail crime are needed.
But as long as those measures are reasonable, safe,
and practical, we, we do think that, um, a number of aspects
of the bill, uh, do meet those criteria.
In particular, the idea that, uh, uh,
fines can be increased, uh, that, uh, there can be, uh,
summary and position of, uh, fines
and, uh, the, uh, new offense, uh, that, uh, deals with the,
uh, um, Incidents of, uh, aggressive, uh, theft.
But we do think that the, uh, proposal to extend, uh, power
of citizen arrest, uh, are not practicable.
Uh, and they could lead to serious, um,
unintended consequences.
Um, so for example, even large retailers don't have the, uh,
amenities to, uh, detain, um, uh,
offenders, uh, safely until such time
as the police can come along and, uh, intervene.
Um, we believe that the, uh, act of arresting could lead to
physical and mental harm to, uh, employees
and members of the pub who, uh, public who might be, uh,
caught up in, in, in, uh, a disturbance.
Um, we also believe that a person being arrested could, uh,
suffer phys physical harm.
Um, and, uh, reflecting something that was said in the last,
but one speaker, uh, there we are also concerned that, uh,
uh, someone contemplating undertaking crime might, uh,
be tempted to arm themselves if they think they might be
subject to, uh, citizens' arrest.
So for those reasons, we, we would recommend, uh,
removing the, um, provision that relates to, uh,
citizen's arrest from the bill,
and the rest of the bill could be passed as it is. Okay.
Uh, Ms. Reman Ackley. Hello, sir.
Um, you referred to large retailers,
and not that I would want businesses to have extra costs,
but from my understanding, talking to different businesses,
a lot of large retailers, um, to have security,
talking about the very large ones, and, um,
and what I've heard from both the security
and management there is that, um,
it'll be great if security would be able to have the ability
for citizens risk
because they've already got the skills,
um, to a great extent.
Uh, what do you have to say about that?
Well, that really contradicts the, um, um,
information we've been receiving from our members, um,
la large retailers.
Um, in, in, um, say for example, um,
um, in, in, in the grocery area
and in, in the hardware area, um, they have said, us, said
to us that they, they really do oppose these. Uh,
Yeah. And that's what I find
interesting.
'cause when I'm speaking to people on the ground, it's, um,
it's, it's very different.
That's the feedback I'm getting in my area.
Okay. Very quick one, obviously we've heard
that retail crime is a massive problem,
the cost 1.2 billion a year.
I mean, are your members happy with the
response they're getting from police
to the retail crime they're reporting, or what? Yeah.
Well, the, the, they, they, they, uh, uh, are fully aware
that a lot of retail crime, um, is, is not reported.
Uh, and they're also aware that, that, uh,
police aren't resourced, uh, as much as they might want them
to, to, uh, deal with and deter, uh, retail crime.
But they obviously, they,
they wouldn't be happy with these losses.
No, of course not. No, because
because they, they, they, they care for their customers,
they care for their employees
and their com they care for their communities.
Okay. Thank you Mr. Cox.
Thank you for your very succinct presentation.
Um, that's really good.
We are now going to take a break members until 1135,
'cause we are here until two.
So, uh, timely. Have a bit of a break. Right?
That was only five.
We are going to have, uh, Ms.
Mary Fagan, uh, by Zoom. Hey, good morning.
Um, we've got five minutes with you.
Okay. I'm Mary Sagan.
I asked to speak because we shouldn't be normalizing New
Zealand's responses to retail crime post COVID-19
when we've got politicians, people in groups
with vested interests in tunnel vision, using misleading,
subjective, and volatile retail crime statistics
to amplify moral panic
to achieve long held visions of community scale.
CCTV, the manufactured moral panic
and reactive retail crime protection program policy from the
Labor Party in mid 2022 contributed to the increased use
of road facing surveillance in our neighborhood,
adding a layer of stress to our daily lives.
According to New Zealand police,
the program does not review ongoing qualifying criteria,
thereby effectively creating permanent 24 7 surveillance in
our neighborhood, um, where we've lived for 18 years,
comfortably enough without it.
Another unnecessary
and harmful response to retail crime, lacking transparency
and proportionality is the six month live facial recognition
trial conducted by Foodstuffs North Island.
Beginning in February, 2024, I immediately wrote to them
to express my concerns about the real potential for harm.
And then less than six weeks later,
we learned about a Maori woman mistakenly identified
as a trespass thief and not believed even
after presenting ID in front
of her son on her birthday in a store she shopped in
for 12 years because it was trialing novel tech
with known bias using poor quality watch lists they had
already been warned about,
and at alert verification settings and biting her harm
and other people's too.
Surveillance based enforcement like this significantly
increases psychological distress reported as high
to very high for about a million New Zealanders
for the latest mental health survey release last month.
The fear of being watched
and the potential for wrongful identification by AI systems
can generate a pervasive sense of vulnerability.
I know it does, because the misidentified Maori woman told
me about her persistent feelings of powerlessness
after I conducted outreach to check on her in May, 2024,
I spent the next 18 months advocating
and supporting her
to hold foodstuffs North Island accountable
for their negligence and for significant
and wholly preventable harm.
Even after they took part in mediation, facilitated
by the Human Rights Commission to resolve the legal matter,
they continued using facial recognition in their stores.
And foodstuffs South Island conducted their own trial in
December, 2025,
and now Bunnings is rolling into,
out across their stores in New Zealand.
When you see that in these stores, previous covert uses
of facial recognition
and abuses of market power, you question who it is acting
with impunity, the victim felt the Privacy Commissioner
shared responsibility because he suggested the trial.
And I agreed. In July, 2025,
after reading the Office
of the Privacy Commissioner's 72 page inquiry report on the
Food Stuff, six month facial recognition trial,
I wrote an article published by the Museum Council
of Civil Liberties, highlighting the reports obvious issues,
omissions bias and leniency, lack of consent
and glaring privacy act compliance,
failures on accuracy and necessity.
I submitted a complaint to the Office
of the Ombudsman based on ample evidence
to support a justifiable grievance on administrative grounds
to explain why the commissioner's conclusion
that the Foodstuffs trial complied
with the Privacy Act was procedurally
unfair and unreasonable.
While my concerns about surveillance
and facial recognition began in 2018,
my direct involvement in this legal matter over the last two
years has come at a personal cost.
It has sent my nervous system already challenged
by post-traumatic stress into a state
of hyper heightened anxiety and hyper vigilance.
I experienced my first
and only panic attack ever at work the day the commissioner
concluded the pr the TUFFS trial complied
with the Privacy Act that was so awful.
I required a medical certificate to excuse me,
from returning to complete the remaining weeks
of my contract role.
I'm exhibiting uncharacteristic behavioral changes such
as scanning for surveillance cameras acting aggressively
and socially isolating grocery
and retail stores are hostile environments.
Now, recently I learned
that pervasive monitoring makes many mental health
challenges worse, and the mental health consequences
of surveillance are increasingly recognized
as significant harms.
Is the government prepared to pay for them caused
by their reactive and unnecessary policies?
We will challenge practices of digital control
and surveillance and hold those accountable
for the human rights abuses
and significant harms resulting from their use
of surveillance oriented security technology systems.
We know people don't want facial recognition in retail
stores based on independently conducted public
perception surveys.
Unlike these self-reported in-store surveys, food stubs
and Bunnings are trying to pass off as legitimate
and hide from public scrutiny.
Privileged members of the Justice Committee.
When will we remedy New Zealand's responses
to retail crime post COVID-19, due to the gap in oversight
by official statistical
and scientific advisory bodies who should have been there
to validate the rapid adoption of industry reported,
tech enabled crime statistics being used
to explain a policy shift and drive public perception.
And when will the Mental Health
and Wellbeing Commission publish publish a specific
dedicated study of the impact of C-C-T-V-A-N-P-R
and FRT on New Zealand, significantly rising levels
of psychological distress.
I hope that you reflect on these questions
and what I've shared before, considering strict liability
or a new infringement offense using these invasive
and harmful tools to their fullest extension retail,
which will further erode trust
and lead to more brazen acts of defiance. Thank you.
Hey, thank you Miss Sagan.
Unfortunately, sorry we're, we're over time,
but, um, thank you for your submission.
We've read it and heard it, so that's very good.
Thank you for, uh, your contribution this morning.
Can we go now to, um, sensible, uh, census trust?
Um, we've got two people. Very good.
Oh, you have been here and you've got a colleague online?
Yeah. Uh, Louise is online. Cool. Brenda is here. Okay.
You've, uh, seen, we've got 10 minutes.
You've been here for a while. Leave some time
for questioning, otherwise we just run out
of time and we can't do it.
Alright. So hundred percent before yours.
Yeah, Louise will be starting.
Yeah, Louise is with us.
Good morning. Uh, Louise. So good morning.
Who would like to, uh, kick it off?
Louise will. So I'll I'll kick off. Can you see me? Yeah.
Yes we can. We, we can hear and see you.
Oh, great. I would've been there in person,
but I have to go to a funeral this
afternoon, so I couldn't make the trip.
Um, so thank you for having me via Zoom.
Um, we are from the Sensible sentencing Trust.
I'm the spokesperson. So I'll quickly do an introduction
and then hand over to Brendan.
Um, we are submitting on the introduction of a new offense
of manslaughter by strike to the head
or neck as part of the crimes amendment bill.
This is the only thing that we are submitting on.
Um, so I just wanted to, by way of introduction, share
with you some poll result polling results
that we received just yesterday.
Um, and they were conducted by the Curia
Market Research Company.
The results are pretty com compelling.
Um, so your voters
were asked if sentencing for the coward punch
by causing death crime be increased to be similar
to those imposed in Victoria or New South Wales Labor.
Your voters showed the strongest support at 66%
followed by Act New Zealand first with 64
and 59% retrospectively national.
Your voters also strong at 55% just one point
above the Green Party support at 54%.
So, um, you know, as a party you might not like
or agree with tougher sentencing or you might not like
or agree with the sensible sentencing trust for that matter.
Um, but we do know you like voters
and you are representing them.
So, um, while you might not like us
or tougher sentencing, you know,
the voters have sent a very, very strong message.
Often voters, they,
they have their differences when it comes
to which party they support,
but very, very clearly, they all support this plea
for tougher sentencing.
So, you know, they,
they are sending you a really strong message
and I really hope you'll be compelled to listen to 'em.
Um, I'll hand over to Brenda now.
He's got a lot more to say than me.
Um, and thank you so much for your time.
Thanks Louise. Thanks everyone for the opportunity today.
I'll make a couple of key points
before leaving substantial time for questions.
Uh, you will have read our written submission, uh, which
of course for, for this law change
to be a much more than a label change.
We're asking for an eight year minimum non-pro term
of imprisonment for killing a person by a coward Punch.
Victoria and New South Wales, uh, impose minimums
of at least six years with an average minimum of
around seven years and headline sentences of nine
to 11 years, which is sort of the maximum
that a person will serve if they are not worthy for parole.
What we're asking for is not radical.
It is simply bringing New Zealand into line
with similar Australian jurisdictions.
It may simply feel as though what we're asking
for is radical or very tough, only
because the sentences the judiciary have handed down
for 24 years in New Zealand
under the sentencing act are so soft.
Now, the sentencing act, of course, is Labor party policy.
It was passed and developed
by the Labor Party under Helen Clark in 2002.
Had that law been developed
and passed by the national government,
a national government at the time,
it probably would be a bit different.
Um, but that's, that's where it stands at at the moment.
We just say to the members
of the committee, what is your number?
We appreciate that. For some of you,
an eight year minimum non parole sentence
might feel a bit tough.
Uh, we wouldn't agree with that,
but obviously we understand that you might hold that view.
But what is your number? Is it seven years? Is it six years?
Is it five years? Whatever number is in your head right now,
it won't be imposed
unless you put in the law that the judiciary must impose it.
And it's actually a very simple drafting change.
You simply say that a person convicted of manslaughter
where the person is killed by a strike to the head
or neck must center must serve a non parole term
of imprisonment of X years.
And you just put in what number is x that that meets your,
uh, meets your values without such a clause.
The ju the judiciary simply have no direction to change
what they're already doing and nor should they change it.
Because the judiciary has set precedent
for the past 24 years.
These sentences are, have to be consistent.
The law requires that,
and it's entirely fair
that sentences are consistent across time.
But if Parliament doesn't tell them to the judiciary, look,
society's values have changed on this a little bit
and this is what we expect you to do now as a bare minimum,
then nothing will change.
And of course you will know that 'cause you are legislators
and I'm happy to take any questions.
Okay, I'm gonna go to
Mr. Jamie Arbuckle
first. Thank you.
I I just wanna pick up on your submission,
'cause it's around the mandatory minimum non parole period
of eight years for this offense.
And that's, that's what you have stated
and that's what you're strong on.
But we all know that a minimum
sentence removes judicial discretion and,
and that that's a concern.
Um, and what I want to know,
are there other sentencing options that you could think of?
Yeah. Uh, around
what would be still effective at raising the sentence
but still give some judicial, um, discretion?
A hundred percent. So a minimum sentence doesn't remove
judicial, judicial discretion.
It just says you can't have discretion
below this level sets a floor.
The judiciary have entire discretion above that to go
as hard as they want.
That's the first thing. Look,
these coward punches causing death typically fall into
two categories.
One category is there's no provocation at all.
The other category is there's a degree of provocation or,
or a what's called excessive self-defense.
Someone defends themself takes it too far, right?
You could, uh, have one mandatory minimum of eight years
where there's no provocation
and maybe another one of, say, six years
or five years where there is a degree of provocation
or excessive self-defense.
That would be a way of, of giving a little bit of, um, uh,
mitigating factor to, to the fact
that there's been an interaction of that nature.
That's one way to do it.
The other way to do it that would actually be effective
or potentially effective is to set a mandatory
sentence starting point.
So instead of a sentence endpoint,
a mandatory starting point, but
because the, the, the sentence discounts
that the judiciary give can be quite waiting, quite chunky,
you've actually gotta start at something quite substantial
around about 25 years as a starting point to get down
to something that would be reasonable.
Because once you take all the discounts into, into a,
into consideration, limited to 40%, well correct, but even
after 40%, the person still comes up for parole
after a third of the sentence.
So if you were trying to do an equivalency between a minimum
of eight years and what would be the starting point,
you'd have to have to get a starting point quite high.
Now, you might not feel comfortable with that.
You might start with a starting point of 20 years. Okay.
Let's go to Dr. Nan.
Uh, thank you chair.
Um, the first question is, so, uh, thank you Luis.
Can I just check if it's appropriate
and also checking with you chair if it's appropriate for you
to send a copy of that survey to the select committee?
Yeah. Cool. Um, yep.
And my second question is just picking up your final point,
um, in your analysis, what are the, you mentioned
that the shorter sentence,
but what is the likelihood of re-offending,
Uh, the, the likelihood of re-offending for these people?
Um, I couldn't give you a figure on that.
It doesn't really matter though,
because what happens here, if we've got a person who's dead,
the issue is the victim's family in many of these cases,
quite rightly, believe that their loved one was murdered.
Now, it doesn't meet their definition of murder.
It doesn't meet the threshold for murder as in intent
or gross recklessness.
But, um, a person's life has been snuffed out
and surely that person's life is,
is worth something better than after 14 months on average.
Would that bring the person back?
It wouldn't bring the person back,
but it would certainly give some
recognition to that person's life.
Okay. I'm going to, um, Mr. Todd
Stevenson even.
Hi. Thank you for being here. Thank for your submission.
Just interested in picking up,
'cause you talked about it both in your written submission,
your old submission, the comparison with Australia
and particularly Victoria New South Wales.
Obviously they have coward punched laws,
but looking at what you
provided that it doesn't appear like their sentences appear
higher anyway,
or even having these kind
of new offenses hasn't resulted in higher sentences.
Yeah. But can you kind of comment on that
and why the difference between,
I think you're saying paragraph 10 here
we're like three years
and four months or something like that.
But can you just talk about
what the difference between Yeah.
Between New Zealand and Australia and
what you think the result of that
is, or why that's occurred?
Look, it's, it's largely in, in my view,
because parliament, uh, multiple parliaments have failed
to act once they've seen the judiciary coming out
with their sentences.
Because these offenses are few and far between.
There's only one a year on average, thankfully,
of a person being killed with a cow punch.
That's one a year too many.
But because it's not a prominent issue, it's hard for you
as politicians to feel that you need to respond to it.
But you've all got an opportunity today to actually respond
to it and, and go look, it's not good enough.
But the other thing is, we were unable to find one
example in Victoria
or New South Wales
where their coward punch law was actually used.
These were all sentenced under their existing
manslaughter provisions.
The difficulty of the committee is if you introduce a new
offense, what is almost certainly going to happen here
as well is the police might charge a person under the new
offense and it'll simply get cleared down
to a lower manslaughter charge that has no minimum
unless you put a minimum in the law.
Okay, now I'm gonna go to Dr uh, Duncan Webb.
Look, I get the whole, uh, punch thing.
And one of the things about manslaughter having no minimum
is it recognizes the wide range of circumstances which
death may be caused.
One of the challenges with this is if you get, say a
young woman walking up to someone in the street
and slapping them in the face,
and then they would, so no intention
to do any grievous harm at all, and then they slip back
and flip over the pavement
and kill themselves by hitting their head,
that would be dead by coward punch on every
definition I've seen.
Can you just explain that scenario again
Please? So some, if
a, if a young woman came up Yeah.
Slapped me in the face for being a Labor Party member, so,
so strike to the head, understandably, strike to the head.
I step backwards, trip over, which is how a lot
of these things actually happen.
It's the fall that kills not punch.
And I die from the blow to my head when I hit the ground to
that person, that offender Be manly,
put in prison for eight years
If you die. Yes,
absolutely. Your life is worth something.
Okay. This, that, that actually
Is, it is an issue.
Useful answer. Right. Hey, thank you
for your submission to both of you.
I hope it goes all this afternoon, Ms. Parsons.
Oh, thank you. And I'll email the, all the results
through each survey.
Thank you. Alright, now we are onto the
New Zealand Law Society.
We've got Professor Finn Beck,
but also of course, um, trustee, um,
person that he always presents with, uh, Chris Macklin.
Right. Are we on board? Are we good? Zoom, are you with us?
Good. Nice to see you again.
And, and you and you can hear me this week, I hope.
Yeah, we can. Let's rip into it. We've got 10 minutes.
Alright, well, uh, Koto, I'm here
with Professor Jeremy Finn from the, uh,
criminal law committee side of the New Zealand Law Society.
Um, you've read our submission
hopefully, or at least you will. Uh, of course we
Endorse. Yeah,
We endorse the amendments of the human trafficking
and exploitation components of the bill.
They're well drafted, they're coherent,
and they reflect proper policy development.
Um, respectfully we distinguish the rest
of the bill in terms of, um, the amendments.
You've been hearing so much about, um, the efforts
to curb offending and improve public safety need
to be commended always, but the bill, uh,
and the new offenses and so on, are unlikely
to achieve either of those aims.
They risk significant undermining, uh, of the law overall
and, and mainly through incoherence.
So we'd be more than happy to join
with others in a broader consultation in terms of some
of the issues that are targeted by the amendments.
Um, but what needs to occur is that those needs
to be put on the back burner
and taken to a consultative process so
that we have evidence driven consultative changes, uh,
rather than focusing on a, a result
and then engineering backwards through through legislation.
So, uh, we've got three things to focus on from what
with some more broad ranging submissions.
Um, Jeremy Finn's gonna come in
with two points about citizens arrest, retail theft,
and the third one I'll cover will be the coward punch, um,
issue in, in, in particular, I'll be highlighting
for the committee a bit of a coherence issue,
which challenges the,
the narrative coming from those in support of,
uh, these new offenses.
So without further ado, I'll hand over, uh, to you Jeremy.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, glad to be back.
Um, there's several issues about the linked issues of, um,
defensive property and, and citizens arrest.
But if I focus, um, one point that,
or two points that are common to both, um, one is
that the real issue with both, um, use of force
to defend property and citizens arrest of how far
employees of a retailer can be required to use force on,
uh, other citizens.
Yes. Now this is actually going to be quite an issue
because the question of of, you know,
what will the contractual position be?
What is the responsibility of an employer
who directs acts which are go beyond, uh, reasonable force?
Um, and that's an area that's obviously going to have very
great impact on workers in the retail area, um,
and for that matter, security guards.
Um, and we think that there needs
to be considerable more thought given to that.
There's obviously, as has been raised
before an issue about, um, using restraints,
following citizen's arrest.
The Children's Commission are very eloquently earlier
umdescribe the problems of arrests
to the widening arrest powers in relation to young people.
And that I think the law society sees
as a very major difficulty with the proposed law
because you would be entitling people to arrest
as a citizen's arrest, people
who the police would not be allowed
to arrest if it were them first appearing.
That seems to say the least odd.
Um, the retail crime provisions are, uh,
difficult, uh, to say the least,
particularly the new proposal proposed section 2 1 9 A,
which is so vaguely drafted
that it's impossible
to apply it consistently over the, uh, over the country.
There is a very real risk that police,
or for that matter retailer arrests will be inconsistent.
And, um, there is also a real problem that it, most of it,
or much of it is already covered by existing law
theft in a threatening manner, which is part
of section 2 1 9 A
is actually already robbery under section, uh,
under the Crimes Act with a considerably higher penalty.
And some will get charged with robbery,
some will get charged with 2 1 9 a
for exactly the same behavior
and get quite remarkably different results.
One of the important ones being that robbery isn't covered
by the clean slate legislation theft is,
so there's a real problem there.
The infringement regime that's proposed is, uh,
also problematic in quite a number of places.
Obviously there's an issue with extending it to young people
who probably can't pay the fines anyway, um, and
therefore will be either spurred into, uh,
treating infringement finds as irrelevant
and not changing their behavior,
or they'll resort to other crime to find the money.
This, the bizarre result that an infringement offense result
would persist forever on their criminal record
while a theft one would disappear under the,
um, clean Slate Act.
And so perversely, it's actually wiser for somebody
to be convicted of theft if it's a one-off than it would be
to have a one-off infringement offense.
And I don't think that has been thought through.
And we would also note that a person who handles goods
that have been, um, taken from retail premises
but not, has not, there's not been a theft conviction,
will not commit the offense of receiving stolen property
because by definition it hasn't been stolen.
Whereas if they do take it when it's been, um, stolen,
they are liable for exactly the same penalties as the thief,
which is surely a far more desirable outcome.
So there needs to be very serious, um, rethinking
of the merits and design of, um, those provisions.
And, um, we would suggest that they not proceed in this part
of the, the bill at this time.
And a major, um, review of it is taken
to see whether it can actually be made workable.
Um, and we'd be very happy to assist with that.
Now I'll return Yep.
I'll return to Chris to talk about Well, we're
Just out running out time and I've got
a question from Honorable.
We, I, look, I'd be interested in any comments you may have
because what this reform, these reforms do is kind of shift
the um, right to use force from the state to the citizen.
Right. Um, and I,
and I'm, um, interested in the defense
of property claims where the legislation removes the saying
that you, you're not allowed to strike or do bodily harm.
And it's a strange thing
to just remove something without positively saying,
and you can do this.
Where does this leave us? Is there a right one?
If this reform were to be complete, will there be a right
on essentially a shop owner to, um, bash
a shoplifter, uh, to in defense of their property?
Um, Chris, you want me to answer that?
The answer is probably, probably not,
unless of course we are going to say that it is an item
that, um, could be dangerous in the hands of other people.
For instance, somebody shoplifts a a,
a weapon from a sports goods, uh,
it might be argued that that's reasonable.
It would also depend,
and this is where we get into really difficult areas,
whether use of a weapon to equalize the risk,
the, the sort of equality of arms argument is reasonable
and there is no guidance on that.
So a small person
shopkeeper using a baseball bat on a large intruder may
be regarded by some courts as reasonable
and may not by others.
So you can get inconsistencies there given
some, some guidance.
We have a current clear guidance.
I think one of the lower society major objections is
there is no guidance.
Once you, once you take the those words out, the uh,
do not hit all strikes.
Thank you. Thank you. Hey, thank you.
Hey, yours are a very weighty submission.
We're not, we don't have time to go all through it,
but we've seen it.
And thank you for those nuanced comments
about some of the elements.
We understand what you're, you're suggesting. Thanks.
Alright, now we are going to modern slavery
and trafficking expert practitioners group, um,
Ms. Rebecca King
and, um, Mr. Clayton Walker, I presume.
There you are. We've got, oh, we've got different people.
Oh, we've got one at least. Right. Hey, good.
Um, we've got 10 minutes.
Please leave some time for some questions.
Thank you ki I will, um, begin by introducing, uh, group
and, um, as you might have gathered from the title,
the focus of our Submiss mission today is on the trafficking
amendments in this bill.
So my name is Rebecca King
and I'm a member of the modern slavery
and Trafficking Expert practitioner group,
alongside my colleagues, Jacob Perry, Clayton Walker,
and Rebecca Armstrong, who will be, um,
submitting later today.
We're a group of legal specialists that have, um,
focused on this area of law due to the practice
that we've had in recent years,
including in New Zealand attempting
to prosecute trafficking in persons matters.
Um, I just would like to thank you for your time.
I'd also like to quickly acknowledge the Justice Minister,
the Honorable Paul Goldsmith
and National mp, Greg Fleming, who have, um, ensured
that these reforms have started
after long call, many, many calls for stakeholders for many,
many years in general,
we support the amendments in the bill related
to the trafficking sections,
and today we just want
to raise a few more proposed amendments that we have
to ensure that actually the intent
and the purpose of this bill in terms
of strengthening New Zealand's ability to prosecute is met.
We want to make sure that we can have a bill that's fit
for purpose, to prosecute trafficking a person's activity,
identify victims, and ultimately
ensure they receive justice.
And of course, we are wanting to align
with international law as much as possible.
And, um, but I want
to emphasize today we are here on a very practical basis.
Ultimately, we're really trying to make these sections
as workable as we can for investigators, for, um,
legal practitioners and prosecutors, for judges
and juries to be able to understand them.
Um, we've been frustrated, the three of us, in trying
to charge cases before
and coming across barriers in the law.
So we're here today to sort of assist with rectifying these.
And I want to echo the law society
and saying thank you for the excellent drafting
that has taken place of these sections,
and hopefully our further proposals can even, um,
get it that more excellent.
I'll pass on to my colleagues,
but I'm going to, um, kick off first just
by looking at 98 B specifically.
So this is the section in the law that defines the terms
to be used in 98 D
and we would like to propose an amendment
to include a specific definition of the term harboring.
Harboring is part
of the act element of the trafficking events.
We've got three elements, act means,
and purpose, which form trafficking events.
And the reason for this is
that the harboring term is often misunderstood.
It often is understood in its sort of, um, obvious meaning
of the concealment of a person,
but actually the United Nations, other states
who have been prosecuting these matters far more
successfully than we have, um, have confirmed
that the term can mean in this context simply accommodating
somebody or holding somebody.
And the reason why we want that
to be really clear in New Zealand law is
that in my experience, in the cases that I've seen
and I've, I've worked in the New Zealand government
trafficking and persons teams I've worked internationally on
trafficking cases, is that, uh,
the harboring element will often be an element
that takes place in trafficking
cases that happen in New Zealand.
So it's very common for there to be, uh,
accommodating of a victim.
Often a victim is dependent on the trafficker
for accommodation as well as their other means to be met.
And we really want to make sure
that this term is well understood so that it can be a term
that's used frequently in charging.
Um, and so I guess having
that element clearly there in 98 B clearly defined could
save a lot of stress, um, in practice in terms
of investigating and charging,
but also save a lot
of unnecessary legal debate should matters,
be successfully charged and go to trial.
Okay. I'll pass on to Jacob now to go
through a few more details that we have.
Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, Koto.
Um, good afternoon, members of the committee.
My name is Jacob Perry.
I am a barrister working in Auckland.
I'm a former crown prosecutor, uh,
and I've conducted human trafficking
and migrant migrant exploitation trials for the Crown.
Um, so I'm just gonna follow on from, um, some of the points
that Rebecca has been making.
Um, specifically the, uh, the recommendations
that we are making in our submission, uh,
involve several additional definitions
that we suggest be included in the amendments
to section 98 B.
Um, the intention in including additional definitions, not
to overcomplicate the legislation in any, in any way,
but to make it clearer, to make it more usable.
Trafficking as an offense, uh, is complex.
Um, it's factually nuanced
and in New Zealand it's not frequently prosecuted,
which means that we have, uh, very limited, um,
opportunities or examples in domestic case law to give us,
um, practical guidance on the core
concepts that we're dealing with.
Um, and I know sometimes we, uh, we like
to leave terms open, uh, as a way of preserving flexibility.
Um, but in these circumstances, um, our, our suggestion is
that this, uh, this uncertainty is not a virtue.
It becomes a barrier to identifying, investigating
and charging these offenses.
Um, I won't repeat, uh, our written submissions,
but I wanted to highlight, um, two of the, uh,
terms we suggest should be defined.
Um, the first is that of servitude, um, which has been, uh,
part of the act, uh, since, uh,
it was initially introduced in 2000, uh, two,
the provision since it was introduced in 2002, um,
but has never been defined.
And the, the point here is it's an important concept that,
that we have, it's part of the offense
and we should be clear about what it is
that we are talking about.
Um, trafficking is not confined to, uh, captivity.
Um, even though that's a a public perception, um,
servitude is circumstances where a person is made
to provide, uh, exploitative labor or services, uh,
and is also deprived of personal freedom.
So, uh, clarity here is going
to help us put a label on a set of circumstances
that exists in practice, um,
but doesn't look like literal imprisonment or,
or doesn't rise to the definition of slavery.
Um, the second definition I wanted to highlight was that
of sexual exploitation.
Um, and we, uh, we're pleased that the, um,
that that, that it's included as a form
of exploitation within section 98 B,
but we, we recommend that a definition be adopted, um,
because it, it could be a fairly, um, nebulous term.
Uh, we wanna make it clear that this can include, um, abuse
of positions of power, vulnerability, trust
for sexual purposes, uh, and,
and quite importantly, making it clear that, uh,
sexual exploitation does not need
to be commercial in nature.
Um, we think that if this is not made clear in the
legislation, there's a risk
that it gets interpreted narrative.
Okay. I'm just conscious about time.
I I can, I can actually,
I can wrap, I can wrap that up there.
Those are the two that I wanted to cover. Um,
And what about Mr. Walker?
Mr. Walker, you got Yeah.
Did you wanna say anything before we go to questions?
Well, thank you. If you do, uh,
just have a little bit more time
for some further submissions.
Thank you. Is, um,
just following on from, uh, the comments about definitions.
Slavery is another one just to, just
to demonstrate the point.
It obviously is a form of exploitation,
but what does it actually mean?
And more importantly, how does a judge, uh,
instruct a jury what it means?
Now in Queen Marta, five,
six years ago in New Zealand's first prosecution
for both trafficking and slavery, uh,
we had a whole legal argument about what slavery means.
We had to have, uh, research submissions,
the judge issuing a written decision, all
of which could have been avoided if
slavery had been defined in the legislation.
Okay, Now, now that's the point
or the points that we wanted to make about 98 B,
which is about definitions.
Uh, but just briefly then, if we have time,
although are you indicating
Yeah, we're, we're just about out of time
and, um, we've got a stack of people to go through.
Can just, um, just, just 30 seconds please.
Because we've read the, everyone's read the submission so
we know what's in the submission.
No, but that's fine. The, the only other, okay.
Can I ask this question then?
The definitions that you propose
and you've got a number of definitions in your submission
and you've very helpfully said exactly
what you're proposing.
That wording, is that a creation from you?
And I understand you're a very experienced practitioner,
so I don't mean this in a demeaning way,
or are they sort of international definitions
that you've picked up or best in class around the world,
or is this something that you're trying to do new
for New Zealand, uh,
and tailor it to the New Zealand sit situation?
No, they, they're based on overseas examples
and picking out what we consider to be the best definitions
of these terms overseas.
Okay. On United Documents and, uh, other examples.
Yeah. Okay. That would be helpful
maybe to have that reference.
But any other questions, guys? We're okay? Hey, thank you.
Don't, don't take this.
We, it was a very good submission
and we read it with interest,
but we do, we're just short of time, unfortunately.
Thank you for, uh, attending this afternoon.
Thank you. Right now we've got, um,
a vis a world vision, um, Ms. Rebecca Armstrong.
Hopefully she's with us on Zoom.
Yeah, zoom. Miss, um, Armstrong, are you here with us?
Yes, I am. Can you see me and hear me? Yeah.
Yeah. We've read your submission. So, um, awesome.
Just highlight the key, uh, aspects, please.
Um, Kiara Tato.
I'm, uh, Rebecca Armstrong, head of Advocacy
and Justice at World Vision New Zealand.
Um, as, uh,
and the submission follows on from the Mstep submission,
which World Vision supports, uh,
and it's focused around slave dealing
and human trafficking offenses.
Um, as you know, we work with children in the communities
around the world to overcome poverty and injustice.
At the center of our work is the belief
that every child should live in the fullness of life.
And that's why, um, these, uh,
provisions are really important to us.
Um, to illustrate why getting these trafficking provisions
right matters for children.
I wanted to briefly share a New Zealand case example.
Uh, in the case of RV Hasty,
a 15-year-old school girl was contacted online
by a man pretending to be a 22-year-old surfer.
Over time, he persuaded her to move to Wellington, uh, uh,
from Wellington to New Plymouth to meet him.
When she arrived, she discovered the
reality was very different.
He was 61 years old.
She ended up living at his house
and was sexually exploited
to provide commercial sexual services
with him taking a large share of the money she earned.
The offending was prosecuted under several offenses,
including assisting a person under 18
to provide commercial sexual services
and receiving earnings from those services.
What's interesting is that in the very same year,
a very similar case in Canada, RV NGI involved girls, uh,
the same age, who were also, uh,
tricked into relationships controlled
in sexual exploitation.
When they tried to leave, they were told they had to break
to, to pay a hundred thousand dollars.
This case in Canada was successful, successfully prosecuted
as human trafficking.
Uh, one, so it's interesting
'cause one of the cases was recognized
as trafficking in persons.
Um, but the New Zealand case was not recognized as this,
even though the material facts were remarkably similar.
At the heart of both of these cases is a simple reality,
which is that children were exploited
for the profit and gain of someone else.
And this is the heart of the definition
of trafficking in persons.
The amendments in this bill are significant
and World Vision support them
because they bring New Zealand definitions in line
with international definitions.
And this means that there should be some consistency to
how cases are prosecuted internationally.
They finally recognize
that when a victim is a child proving coercion,
deception should not be necessary, which is something
that seek to have advocated for years, uh,
and the amendments will materially improve
how investigation, identification,
and prosecution of trafficking offenses in New Zealand, uh,
takes place and bring the criminal legislative framework
closer to its intended purpose, while also aligning
how other jurisdictions prosecute and count this crime.
This is incredibly important
because there are many people like Gloria Masters
who shared her story this morning,
whose experiences reflect similar patterns of exploitation.
These amendments will not only strengthen the ability
to prosecute offenses effectively,
but they're also now going to help ensure that children
who are trafficked or exploited are co correctly identified
as victim survivors of trafficking and slavery.
This is going to help New Zealand identify, understand,
and quantify trafficking
and modern slavery cases so
that we can respond more effectively
and provide appropriate care and support to survivors.
Um, there is a perception
that trafficking in person cases don't happen in
New Zealand, but I wonder if we haven't been recognizing
them because the law hasn't been fit for purpose,
allowing us to identify them correctly.
Um, I was going to talk a little bit about, uh,
the importance of the definitions that Mstep have, uh, said,
but I'll move on and just, um, reiterate some other points
that my colleagues have made this morning, which is just
that laws alone cannot protect children
and, uh, victim survivors.
International best practice,
including under the Lumal protocol, recognizes
that an effective response to trafficking requires three
pillars, which are prevention, protection, and prosecution.
Um, this bill strengthens the prosecution pillar,
which is essential,
but it has to be supported by strong systems
that identify exploited children
and other victim survivors early,
protect them from further harm and support their recovery.
Um, as my colleagues have said this morning,
we don't have adequate, uh, victim services currently,
and so our submission is
that these should be included in parallel.
Finally, it's important to note that in February
of this year, um,
and one slavery bill was introduced at Parliament with 81%
of all mps in support of this.
And it's now on the order paper to go to first reading
and begin the select committee process.
Um, modern slavery legislation is important
because it asks New Zealand businesses to understand slavery
and trafficking in persons in a deeper
way than they have before.
And I just want to commend the government
for getting the terms and definitions of slave dealing
and trafficking in person right at the same time
as introducing this Mons slavery bill
because correct definitions
and identification are essential components
of an overall strategy to end mons slavery. Thank
You. What a great submission.
Now we've got a question from honorable Dr. Duncan Webb.
Yeah, Curto, you might take a breath first. That's speed.
I, I listened to the quickly do it and I I tried to
Comply. We're a fast moving committee
as Yes.
We had, um, some lawyers on
before talking about definitions,
and you've talked about sexual exploitation as well.
They argued that there should be a statutory def definition
of a few terms, including sexual exploitation.
I guess the flip side of that argument is that it comes in
so many different shapes and sizes, if you know what I mean.
Um, that if you define it, you run the risk
of constraining it
and some behavior, which is clearly exploitative,
but falls outside of those words isn't captured.
Do you have a view about whether we should be trying
to capture what sexual exploitation means,
or should we leave it for the judge to sort that out?
I think it's a great question
and it's, um, I'm part of the Mstep group who, who went
and we've wrestled with this, uh,
because we don't want to create onerous definitions.
But the point is because there's been such a low number
of prosecutions of trafficking offenses and
because these terms are not well-defined
or understood in New Zealand, we really do believe
and assert that these definitions are needed
and required at this point.
And, you know, uh, we don't have jurisprudence, uh,
we don't have domestic case law to refer to.
So, uh, in the absence of that and,
and in the absence of, I think this case examples really,
uh, is quite fitting
because we're, we are not classifying as human trafficking
what Canada is.
And it's because we, we lack some
of these definitions, I would say. Alright.
Alright. Just very quick question, uh,
'cause I asked the question, uh,
before to one of the submitters, do you support mandatory,
uh, reporting of, of tra trafficking
and those types of offenses and,
and, uh, establishment of a register?
I presume that's what you mean on your last page
Of, um, yeah.
We, we, uh, support the modern slavery bill
that's been introduced to, uh, parliament.
And we would say, uh, when 81% of mps also support it, um,
we, we would submit it should go further up
the order paper to be heard. So,
But, but, but no, no, this is not quite about the id, the
mandatory reporting and, um, establishment of a register
that was one of the, um, submissions that earlier today.
Is that something you also support?
'cause you seem to infer it at the back of your submission.
Um, I think there's,
there's two different, uh, components.
Uh, I, I'm, I'm a bit confused whether you are referring
to the modern slavery, uh, ACT or Bill.
Yeah. Because that's a, that's a little bit separate to the,
uh, criminal provisions we're talking about today.
Yeah, I was talking about Survivor, your on page.
Oh, sorry. Yes, absolutely.
Because, uh, at the moment, as, as I, and,
and this has come up, uh, today, we,
we have no understanding of the prevalence
of trafficking here.
And so the, the counting of, in quantifying, um,
of these offenses is, is incredibly important in,
in the understanding of that.
Hey, thank you for submission.
Um, Ms. Armstrong, very helpful. Thank you.
Right now we've got rate Retail New Zealand, um, led by Ms.
Y. Nice to see you. Thank you
Chair. Um, great
to see everyone again today.
And, uh, just quickly, I Chief Carolyn Young,
chief executive of retail NZ my colleague Denise, uh,
Garland, who is the, uh, manager of, uh, advocacy
and Ben Murton Phillips, who, uh, leads our, uh,
data insights and policy look, um,
we know you've read our
submission, so we're not gonna repeat that.
I've got a few introductory remarks that we'll make
and then we'll be open for questions.
So look, while we acknowledge the crime bill includes
several proposals for change,
retail NZ members have major concerns with that.
The citizens arrest provisions within this bill would expose
retailers, their staff and their customers
to increased risks of physical danger
and could cause serious harm and even death.
Uh, citizens arrest, uh, is not a retail solution
to addressing crime in our stores.
Among our members, major concerns is
that it's in direct contradiction
to our health and safety laws.
The use of mechanical restraints would place staff
and customers at an acceptable risk of harm provisions
to allow striking someone has potential to encourage the use
of violence in response to retail crime.
And stores are not properly equipped
to detain people in either, either staffing
or facility-wise.
The majority of retail crime happens
in the big retail stores.
We're looking at about 85% happens in the big stores.
Um, and that comes from, uh, police data.
So one of those large retail, um, retailers
that we're speaking to just this week, they said to us
that they would not allow us
and quote, they would not allow their staff
to undertake citizen's arrest on their property
under any circumstance.
Um, this bill requires
that people performing citizen's arrest
to contact the police as soon as practical.
Look, New Zealand police are constantly responding
and prioritizing serious events that they have coming
through 1 1 1 on an ongoing basis.
This bill increases the workload
and pressure put on police force,
which is already stretched,
and it's our belief that they won't have the resources
to be able to respond to those inquiries.
And then it puts at grave danger, the person
that's done the citizen's arrest as to
how they release someone safely without
getting harmed themselves.
We do support the messages you've heard this morning from
the police association, the Law society
and Children's Commissioner, just to name a few.
Um, we know that, um, you know,
more thought is needed in this space.
And, and, uh, one of the other comments that we've got is
that we, we do think
that citizens arrest powers would likely
endanger young people.
Uh, they contradict everything we know about child
wellbeing, youth development, and safe communities.
Um, prevention, support
and train police responses are the right tools.
And we just fi finish by saying that, you know,
this isn't a retail solution.
Um, not only is violence not the answer, combating violence
with violence is just not the Kiwi way.
Okay. Thank you. Right.
First question from honor vulnerable, Ginny Anderson, uh,
Thank you very much for your submission.
Um, I'm interested to know the intersection between health
and safety requirements, particularly in the workplace.
So there's some quite, um,
heavy obligations on the employer.
How, how do the proposals within this bill intersect
with those, those upcoming changes in health and safety?
Yeah, but look, they contra,
they contrave them completely.
So, um, the responsibility of employers
to provide the right tools,
training in a safe work environment, you're expected
that you can come to work in a safe space
and you can leave with the same wellbeing
that you had when you arrived.
Um, if, if an employer is asking a, a staff member
to undertake a citizen's arrest,
they would be in contradiction of, of that act.
And we have spoken to, uh, the minister,
minister van den about, you know, there is no determination
around the hierarchy of where health
and safety sits across this.
There is the expectation that
that would supersede a citizen's arrest,
and she was going to go and clarify that.
Okay. Uh, one
More. Yes, one more.
Um, in terms of what guidance you would give
to your own members around that, are you, um,
do you have any further indications when, I mean,
there may be sort of legal action from employees
to employers if they were required
to undertake a citizen's arrest and didn't do it,
or then did do it injured?
Do, do you have any sort of indication of what kind
of guidelines would be available for
employees and employees?
Yeah, so firstly, we haven't met any retailers
that have said to us that they
would like to put this in place.
And, and when you speak, uh, we've got a crime working group
that we consult with, and they form our submissions
and we consult with our members.
They know that if, if they, what they're gonna have
to do is they're gonna have to put in place a variation
or a policy in place that employees will have to sign
that really clearly stipulates what,
that they cannot do a citizen's arrest in the workplace
because they're not trained to do so,
and it is not safe for them to undertake that.
And so employees will need to understand what that means.
And so that's a lot of policy
and procedure that they'd have to put in place
and going forward, employee contracts would need
to have it incorporated in terms of that space.
What they can't control is what customers
and the general public might do when they come
into that environment.
And I think, um, so, so yeah, it's, you know,
if a customer comes up and, you know, say I arrested Denise,
and then I'm gonna come up
and say, um, uh, here we go, Jenny.
Um, here's someone for you.
I've done my shopping, I'm off for the day.
Uh, and off you go out the door.
What are, what does the staff member do then?
Because you're not equipped to deal with that. Yeah.
Okay. I'm going to Ms. Todd. Steven.
Well, I suppose it's coming onto
all question a couple of questions.
Yes. I mean, one, just want to confirm, I mean,
your members are concerned about retail crime
and the amount of losses they're incurring.
Yes, they are. But they don't see this a prevention,
No. Okay. No. Good. Just wanna
confirm that. Yep.
Secondly, we wanna get this kind, get this right. Right.
Yeah. But obviously we've all heard of the stories
of people walking out of large supermarkets, large, um Yep.
Retailers with shopping trolleys and stuff.
So again, just putting aside the mechanism. Yes. Yeah.
Do your members wanna be able to just at least intervene
and stop those goods leaving their premises?
Yeah. It's about having the right trained people
to be able to do the right things in a safe way.
So, um, you know, using a number of tools, so it could be
around facial recognition
technology that you could be using.
You could have potentially advanced security guards
where you'd have a few guards
that are trained at a higher level
who may have higher powers that would have greater insight
around how to approach someone when
to know about deescalation and step back Yeah.
And when not to. So it's sort of getting fit for purpose,
the right tools in the right situations.
Yeah. That's good. I think, because we just wanna
understand it, but they, they do wanna stop large numbers
of goods leaving their store.
Absolutely. Yeah. Absolutely. And, and,
and I think just for your reference, um, you know, one
of the things we know about retail crimes,
there's no one solution.
So retails, you know, they have to think
of a whole wide range of things.
They need to think of store layout where the CCTV is,
you know, do they have visibility of people coming in,
what customer services, all of, you know,
alongside all of these other things.
Yep. Brilliant. Thank you. No worries.
Just in addition to that, uh, you've talked about, you know,
uh, retailers requiring staff, this is an option,
it's not a requirement.
Yes. And a number of people have made
that comment about forcing staff members
and young women or whatever.
Mm-hmm. The, um, I don't think that was ever the intent,
but what the bill does do is provide an option.
Mm-hmm. In some cases, people will feel that they want to,
and certainly we've heard from, you know, the, uh, smaller
retail supermarket people who feel repeatedly subject
to intimidation.
Mm. So given it is an optionality,
it's not a requirement, it's not mandatory.
Doesn't it provide you with more comfort?
Uh, look, it is, it, it is, um, uh, it is a really,
um, it is an option
and we don't expect, um, everyone to take it up.
But the challenge that you have faced is
that it's actually not a retail solution.
You can do a citizen's arrest in any environment.
If you think the way it's framed, the way the wording
of the bill is framed without any alterations, it is, it is
that you can do an arrest on the street,
you could do one at a sports event,
you could do it here in
parliament, you could do it anywhere.
And so any citizen can undertake any arrest for any,
any offense that they think is happening,
whether it's a bottle of water versus the current framework
that's currently sitting for citizens arrest,
which whilst it may not be fit for purpose, now,
this is a long way from where we're at.
So, you know, what we do think would happen, uh,
potentially if, um, if someone is going into somewhere
where they think that they understand that a, a,
a retailer may undertake a citizen's arrest, they'll arm up,
they'll, instead of bringing in a knife this big,
they'll bring in a machete or, or
Typically, see, I've heard that argument before,
and I don't accept it because I think people,
the people doing this will go to the place
of least resistance.
So they know if they're gonna turn up in a corner store
and they'll be a reaction, they will more likely
go somewhere else to a store
where they can all send them out.
So that assumption that you people have made, uh,
you know, that is an assumption.
Well, we already see it though.
We already see, um, machetes and guns in our stores now.
Oh yeah. Look, I, uh, that is a possibility.
But one other option, the other likely option is that those
criminals that are doing it repeatedly will choose the
easiest target where they know they can go in
and out of a store, take what they want,
and not be subject to any, um, interference, whereas they go
to a certain store, know they're gonna be subject
to interference, they won't go there.
Mm. So they, my my question is,
everyone assumes what you're saying.
I'm not sure that is a possibility,
but it's not the only possibility.
No, it's not the only possibility,
but it's also why a wide range
of things need to be put in place.
But I think there is the risk that the average person
that comes into your store will undertake a citizen's arrest
in your store and leave you with the responsibility
as a store owner to, to um, sort out what happens next.
Yeah. And there's a bit of liability that sits.
Of course. I understand that. But very good.
Hey, thank you for that. Very helpful. Thank you very much.
Given the people that you represent now, uh,
we are moving on to, uh, Ms.
Kay Jones. Nice to see you again.
Kiaa committee. Yeah, good
to see some familiar faces here.
And it's also been really, um, helpful.
I've been watching from home,
so I've seen the submissions from police
association and the others.
And it's great to hear some sensible voices like retail
association about the, um, potential risks in this.
Now, my written submission with very much on the,
imagine we've got two voices.
One is the calm, sensible voice that's saying
what they think should happen.
That's probably more my written submission.
Then there's the other voice, which is, hey, great,
I'm passionate about community and individual safety.
I would love Parliament to license me
to make a citizen's arrest anytime
I believe a crime has been committed.
Now, I'm a former retail worker.
I've been an usher at picture theaters.
I've been an employment officer.
I've had, um,
knife prevents presented at me in the workplace.
I have had no training whatsoever in deescalating crime.
It has not stopped me from talking down people.
And now that I'm retired
and look like an older respectable Pakeha woman,
which I'm actually not, um,
and I would prefer you not to call me Ms, it's mix, um,
non-binary, non sort of gendered, um, um,
pronouns would be great, but intervene.
So during COVID, for example, I saw security guards trying
to deal with people trying to force their way into premises,
not wearing masks, arguing about why should you stop me?
And because I am not a security guard,
I could be more in the front of those people.
I've had interventions on the bus where a passenger has been
verbally abusive to the bus driver while a bus driver
is trying to drive.
And so as a deescalation,
I have engaged the passenger with that.
Is this safe? Is this sensible?
No, it's not on the least bit side,
but as you properly gathered,
I'm a passionate individual willing to actually stand up
and not be just a bystander,
but to take matters into my own course.
Now, I don't really sensibly think
that Parliament should endorse me to take this action
because it runs risks.
And I put in my submission the risks that have happened
to small retail owners who have tried to do equivalent
to citizens advice and intervening.
And some of those people have died.
There are better ways to manage the hazards
that are confronting retail organizations
for long-term solutions.
We've heard some of them, there's more, um, solutions,
but I'll just stop there because I'd love
to share more experiences or ideas.
Thank you. Right. We're going to Mr. Todd,
Steven, can I just call you K? Is that okay? Yes,
That would be great. Thanks,
Todd. Just so
we don't have to go into a pronoun discussion.
Um, look, thanks for your submission. Great.
And I read it all. It was great.
We actually had you at kind of point 30,
I think we actually had that gentleman
that you're referencing here,
um, Sterling Sports and Upper Heart.
He was actually here this morning and gave evidence.
And, um, it's good.
I mean, you've obviously talked a bit about his experience,
but, um, I don't know if you, well, you saw him today,
but he was visibly upset and actually what his,
and you're right, he's finally, he actually finally got the,
the young people who three times had come
and robbed his store.
Completely unacceptable.
Um, but actually now, um, he's having a, a, an,
a very difficult time with the criminal justice system.
'cause now he's being asked to go to, you know,
group conferences and,
and that's kind of taking him out of his gonna,
taking him out of his business, et cetera.
And obviously it was a very upsetting time.
Um, do you think there are?
Yeah, I mean, one of the other things we're looking at in
this bill is a regime around, um, fines.
So like more of a kind of summary offenses
and giving people fines.
Try. 'cause I mean,
I think we've all accept this is an issue.
People's businesses and livelihoods are being affected.
It's just what is the right responses
and how can we actually make it fair both on the retail
owners, like the gentleman we had this morning,
and obviously making sure we're not overly harsh
on the people doing this.
When we say this is an issue, there's more than one issue.
I mean, if you compare, say the, um, 12-year-old
who shoplifts a chocolate bar because they're hungry,
and they may be, oh, they can then another time
or two get a bag of chippies
or something, then yes, that's a bad, um, conduct.
But there's also, if they're doing it
because they're hungry, then why aren't we addressing
that issue that is different to a group of people
who are organized and doing repeat offenses?
And if, for example, um, the government
provided a subsidy so that every small business,
especially dairies could have, um, closed camera tv
and that could be connected up so
that photo evidence could be
provided to the local police station
who could then hunt down the people and arrest them.
Like, should it take three times or more times
before there's actually action to track down the people
and say, Hey, what's going on?
But like, don't conflate those issues of saying every,
every theft may feel really bad for the shop owner
and it's emotionally draining
and it's difficult and they need more support.
And that's true. But not every offense is going to be
of the same type, like the 80%
of large retail crime on those shopping trolleys.
That shouldn't be something that the staff have to deal
with at the point there needs to be a wraparound system.
So at my local supermarket, there was a chap who started,
um, who came in partially clad, started jumping onto on top
of the checkout counters, was being
potentially violently aggressive.
The security guard kept the customers away from
that while the store owner called up the police.
Five police came
and it took all five of them to take that person down
because the person was on a meth driven rage.
Now, you can't expect a small store owner
to be able to deal with that.
The police did that. And again,
that was handled in a wrap around way.
And it needs to be these big, you know,
what's locally appropriate.
Can a local police officer respond to things?
I mean, like, as I said with my, um, I want to intervene
as a community moderator.
If I see things happening in my neighborhood,
do I go to intervene?
Do I call up the police
and say, Hey, I'm going off to make a citizen's arrest
and I'll be there in the next half hour.
If you turn up, that's fine,
otherwise I'm going to be doing that.
I mean, that's not fair to the police, um, to sort
of actually give me that additional power
because it just highs that up.
And it might be something as small as lighting, um,
a fire on an air on an open park, which not great.
Okay. But again, so I'm just saying, yeah, it needs
to be a big wraparound solution. Right.
But, but you No, no, no, no, no. Sorry, sorry.
We are way over time now. Thank you, Kate.
Thank you for coming again. Alright, you're welcome.
Thank you. Right. We've got,
I'll probably be back in another week or two,
Right? We've got
Michael Mar, uh, Morris. Um, is he online?
He is Mr. Morris, are you there?
You there, Mr. Morris?
Good technology, isn't it?
It keeps declining. And Mr. Morris, if you can hear me, um,
if you can just accept, we're just waiting for you now,
otherwise we'll go on and come back perhaps.
Yeah,
let's go to the next one.
Alright, now we've got two submissions anyway.
Mr. Lo,
One, Mr.
No, no, no, no. Mr. Mr. Lo. Lo. Yeah.
Right. Mr. Loi, you with us?
Chris? Six. You need to press, uh, six
Chair an the committee.
Very good. Hey, we've just, um, got five minutes with you.
So, um, leave a bit of time for questions.
We've all read your submission.
Right. Thank you. My name is Gregory, EA
and I paper for you and my individual capacity.
As uh,
and as someone with has practical experience in frontline
security, I thank you for the opportunity to provide,
to provide feedback on the Crohn's,
on the Crohn's amendment Bill 2 2 3 1 20 25.
At the outset, I acknowledge the bill's purpose,
strengthening public safety and enhancing deterrent
and protecting first responders and custodial officers.
These are vital objectives.
However, I submit several provisions that while in while,
while well intentioned require collaboration
to ensure clarity, functionality,
and operational effectiveness.
Number one, expansion
of citizens arrest powers clauses four to nine.
The bill proposes broadening citizens arrest powers
and obliging individuals to contact police as soon
as practical practicable, while empowering victims
and businesses is laudable, the delegation
of decisive authority
to untrained civilians carry significant loss.
The phrase, as soon as practicable is vague
and may lead to inconsistent interpretation
or worse vigilant style escalation from frontline.
From a frontline perspective,
the law must guide civilians clearly, who can act when
and what and to what extent.
Without such boundaries,
the situations can escalate putting individuals,
putting both civilian civilians and public at risk.
I recommend a clear statu,
a clear statutory qualifiers on when
and how citizens arrest may be used.
A codified proportionality test for the use of force
and an unequivocal requirement
for immediate police notification and transfer of custody.
The refinements protect civilians, prevent ability,
detention, and reduce civil liability risks.
Aggravated offenses against first responders
clauses 21 to 24.
The bill rightly enhances penalties
for assault on first responders and correction officers.
Those protecting public order deserve robust
statutory protection.
However, increasing penalties alone does not
guarantee deterrence.
Many assaults occur during acute psychiatric crisis
or under substance impairment.
A purely ative approach may entrench systemic
issues rather than address them.
I propose mandatory mental health assessments
for relevant cases before sentencing
a statutory review clause post-implementation
to evaluate whether higher penalties effectively reduce
assault on responders.
This ensures legislation is both protective
and evidence involved balancing deterrence
with the rehabilitation, with rehabilitation opportunities.
Number three is theft in theft
and disorder or threatening manner.
25 pause 25, criminalize theft in an offensive, threatening,
insulting, or disorderly manner.
While clarity is important, conflating behavioral disorder
with property crime risks over criminalization.
Low value theft often arises from social vulnerabilities
rather than predatory intent.
Recommendations define disorderly
and other behavioral thresholds precisely.
And my recomme second recommendation is
to consider diversion
or restorative mechanisms
for low value offenses without harmful intent.
This, this preserves the prosecution
direction, uh, discretion.
While over, while avoiding unnecessarily pun of outcomes,
oversight and,
and sunset review, the bill expands persuasive powers
and panel exposure argument.
Argumenting state authority should be paired
with structured oversight.
A sunset or mandatory review within 18
to 24 months would allow parliament
to evaluate operational impacts including police, workload,
court congestion and,
and effects of marginalized on marginalized communities.
In summary, I support the bill the bill's objectives got
urged to committee to embed doctrinal clarity,
proportional safeguards, and empirical
empiric court accountability.
Criminal law reform must be decisive,
but disciplined by ensuring clarity
and oversight, parliament will enhance public safety while
maintaining legitimacy
and durability of the reforms
further for your consideration.
Hey, thank you. Um, any questions?
Look, um, uh, we are very grateful to have someone
from the personal security sector.
Um, so, uh, thank you for making that submission
because we were asking about that earlier, about making sure
that we got representation.
So your comments are gratefully welcomed
and, uh, appreciate you taking the time this morning.
Did you hear me? Sorry? Did you hear me? Mr. Sorry.
Sorry. We just, we just here. Sorry. Sorry, Mr.
Chair, we just lost you for a second there.
Uh, look, I just, uh, said thank you
for making your submission.
We've, um, haven't heard from, uh,
directly from anyone from the personal security,
um, industry.
So very, your contribution's very welcome this morning.
So thank you for the time that you've, uh,
taken to present your session.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chair.
Okay. Thank you. Right now are we going back?
Can't get, alright, so we are going now to, uh, we always,
uh, have we got our Woolworths people here online.
Okay. Do you guys want a break?
I'm just looking at the members. Anyone want a break?
No, it's push off. Okay.
We've got our Woolworths representatives here.
Hey, just indicate if you wanna break.
Are you there? Um, the representatives from Woolworths?
Yes, we're here. Oh, yeah. Good.
Are you, um, are you on Zoom
or are you gonna call on telephone?
Uh, we're on Zoom. We can see you.
Oh, here you are. Yeah.
Great. See, and just for the, um, for the Clark,
we've got Denver in, um, joining us.
She's in Sydney today based in New Zealand.
So there's someone else. Oh, you're
Pulling out all stops.
Okay. Out all the stops. Right. Cool.
And now we've got 10 minutes with you.
You've probably been watching, uh,
we've all read submission.
So just please highlight the big stuff
and then we can ask some questions.
Yeah, great stuff. If we could get,
if we could let Denver in, in from, from the, um,
from the waiting room, that would be good as well.
She's there, apparently she's there. Oh,
Very good. There she comes now.
That's great. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, great to be here. Um, I'm here with, um,
James Radcliffe, our general
counsel at Woolworth New Zealand.
And Denver is, uh, head of safety well health
and wellbeing, uh, given the time, uh, we support, um, much
of what's in the bill, uh,
have some concerns about other things.
We'll focus on those concerns, uh, first.
Um, and, uh, James is gonna kick us off, uh, mainly
around the citizen's arrest provisions.
Okay. Thanks Mr. Chairman.
We'll take your feedback on board to keep this brief.
So I've written out some notes, but I'll dispense with those
and just hit the high points if you like, and, and,
and give you some time to ask.
We love high points Questions
and it's, it's great to see you again.
Um, I think as Andrew mentioned, uh,
I think generally we're supportive of the bill.
There's just really one area that we have some concerns.
And I think we were listening earlier,
I think others probably have expressed the same concerns
that's in relation to the expansion
of the citizens' arrest powers.
And the reason we've got concerns about that was
because based on our experience during COVID and,
and dealing with customers, that we feel that
that could inadvertently lead
to greater violence in our stores rather than lesser.
Uh, and I'll, I'll just cover a couple of points
and then I'll hand over to Denver.
I think, uh, you know, first concern is that, that,
that the bill potentially moves the responsibility
or the, the burden
or duty for law enforcement away from police to, to citizens
and, and to supermarkets.
Um, I think the second concern we have is in relation
to our duties or obligations to our team under health
and safety laws, to keep them safe as far
as reasonably practicable.
And, and I guess encouraging them to involve themselves in
citizens arrest would be contrary to that, we believe.
Um, and what we are seeing is that physical contact
with offenders by a team
or customers increases the risk
of weapons being used in our store by around 400%.
Uh, and increasingly we're seeing, uh,
offenders carrying knives, machetes, hammers,
and, uh, other types of weapons into our stores.
And lastly, and probably most significant,
and we really did see this over COVID, that the bill could,
um, or the citizens' arrest power could,
could create an impression in customers' minds
that our team should be intervening, um,
and exercising these powers.
And that puts our team in a pretty difficult position, uh,
in terms of do they stand back
and ignore a struggling customer trying
to arrest an offender, uh, or do they break our protocol
and our policies by, um, intervening?
I think Denver's got, probably got some more, um,
concrete examples from the,
from her role on the stuff that she's seen.
So I'll hand over to Denver,
Mr.
Chairman and, uh, select committee members.
Uh, look, I've, uh, got 17 years in the business, uh,
both operationally, uh, within Woolworth New Zealand
and in leadership roles, uh, in the people
and the safety space, uh, about 10 years as,
uh, a head of safety.
The experience that we are seeing,
and the voice that I can bring to the table today is that
of, of our frontline team, where we have 18,000 team, uh,
working across our supermarkets.
And the, the potential risk around the introduction
of citizens arrest is that we, we do believe that offenders,
uh, will likely escalate much more quickly
with a preemptive, um, expectation that potentially, uh,
citizens rents could be used.
So therefore they come in greater prepared
with weapons already referring
to the fact we have edge weapons and iron bars and,
and a team, uh, being threatened
with these on a weekly basis.
So generally about 60 to 70 serious events a year
where there are edge weapon events.
And that not only that escalation of violence, the speed and
or nature, um, but that our team and customers
and community will potentially be put at greater risk.
There's another aspect here around, uh, citizens that rest
around the practicalities.
So the danger of if restraints could be used
or were used the likes of handcuffs
or the likes of, uh, zip ties, you know,
really needing tactical competency for those, using
that equipment to be able to do so safely, uh, particularly
around what if there was a medical event
or what if there was actually harm to that offender
and potential, um, medical emergencies.
How did the team respond?
And as an organization, um, you know,
actually who's liable in that space if it's actually been,
uh, added in, in action
or interaction by either
a team member or member of the public.
And a, a definite lack of infrastructure.
We are not geared up, um,
to a super supermarkets and not detention facilities.
So we're do not have rooms, amenities, uh, available
to even hold for police to be able to come.
And, and we just wanna be very honest about that.
Our examples are based on our experience.
Uh, you know, we are one
of LA the largest New Zealand, uh, retailers.
We have been very active in the space, uh,
regarding acts of violence and aggression.
We have had the most extreme events in our business.
And back in 2018,
we had a fatality involving a guard in our pap store.
So we have had the extreme end events of the likes of, um,
an event where a guard went to interact and intervene
and they were punched and killed.
And we've obviously had a number of, uh, stabbing events
and shootings in our stores as well.
Uh, this is not historic though.
Uh, what I would say is just in the last week,
we've had an example in our rot store in Hamilton where
very experienced store manager
and leadership team were involved in a, um,
what we thought was a customer going through checkouts
and actually having their whole grocery load
scanned at checkouts.
But then when it was a non-payment, they refused to pay,
they were asked to pay, and they lashed out
throwing punches at team, throwing punches at the store
manager, very violent and aggressive,
and it escalated quickly.
Uh, you know, our protocols are that our team stand back
and let that person go
because we do not want our team to put at harm,
but the potential of, you know, enacting a citizen's arrest,
we then even with multiple team members,
that they could be put at risk.
I, and or if we do not intervene
and restrained actually that other pub members
of the public may step in.
We have had that, uh, previously on numerous occasions.
Uh, there's one event that always comes to mind.
It was in our Lia Mata store where our team stepped back,
they leave an offender, um, leave through the self-checkout,
and it was a member of the public who stepped in
and actually they had a knife pulled on them,
so right in the front of our store
and as that offender was leaving.
And so the reality of weapons being held on person
and the potential for those to be
presented is extremely real.
And, and we are very concerned about this.
So I might pass back to you, James.
Yeah, and I think just very briefly in closing the
disorderly theft defense, we are very supportive of that.
We, we, uh, see this as filling the void
that currently exists between simple shoplifting and,
and a much higher threshold of robbery.
And noting that 42%
of high value thefts in our stores
involve disorderly elements.
So either groups creating chaos, shouting,
knocking over displays, throwing things, uh, either
to intimidate or distract the team
or, um, create content for their social media pages.
So I think, uh, anything that can deter
that I think we're supportive of.
Cool. I'm gonna go to Mr. Todd Stevenson. Hi. Thank you.
Thank you for appearing and thank you for your submission.
Uh, I know you're basically saying you're about 400, 440
fifths a week, uh, in 2025.
Is that correct? That's in your submission,
or is that not just relate to Woolworths?
I suppose what I wanna ask is, are you able to quantify
what is, what is retail fifth from your stores in
New Zealand costing you annually, roughly?
First question, and secondly, what's the consequence?
I, I'm assuming it's a large number.
And so what's the consequence of a business like yours on
that, on that loss?
Do you have the, do you have the most
recent numbers for that? I think, um,
The most recent numbers and happy to lean in, look, the,
the current, uh, retail crime value is about $30 million,
uh, a year in our business for Woolworths New Zealand.
30 million. 30 million. Yes. Yep.
Now we're working, um, tirelessly
and we have invested significantly, uh,
obviously in the last couple of years we've invested, uh,
and we've been very public about this, uh,
$45 million in additional controls to help keep our team
and cus customers safe, that that is very much around, uh,
safety implementation, not purely to reduce stock loss
and uh, offender behavior,
but we do know that these go, some of these go hand in hand.
So there are a number of controls we can What
Sort of Denver, just be specific, that's a big thing.
When you, what are you, what are you doing
with your 45 million bucks?
Yeah, it's a great question. We've deployed, uh,
smart solutions with our trolleys so that a number of our,
our high risk
and repeat offender stores that have, you know,
pushed full trolley, loads out four, five, $10,000 worth of,
uh, groceries at a time.
This is not the moms
and dads who are not able to feed their family.
This is potentially offenders who are
stealing the large quantities
and potentially to order, um,
pushing those out of our stores.
So those trolleys lock, uh,
they actually prevent full loads from going out.
Potentially bags are taken,
but it's a much lesser value right through to push
to talk radios for our team body-worn cameras.
Uh, we've really upgraded our CCTV
to help enable making sure that the information
that's passed to Aura into the police is able
to be useful from retail crime, uh, squad perspective.
So certainly really looking at a large number
of controls right through to, uh, toughened
and strengthened glass in the front of our stores
for at risk of, uh, Ram raids, uh, bollards in the front
of our stores, there are a number of controls.
Alright, good. All right. Any other questions?
Hey, thank you to the three of you for that submission.
It's very interesting what, what, um,
other mechanisms you're putting in place.
That's fascinating. Alright, thank you. Thanks,
Thank you. We're
Gonna now move on to, uh, the Law Society,
uh, by Zoom of course association.
Miss, uh, who are you
with us this morning or this afternoon?
What's that? Oh, good day.
Hello. Hey, nice to see you this afternoon. Uh,
Good afternoon. My name is
Tracy, who I'm a barrister here at City Chambers.
I'm here on behalf of the Law
Association's Criminal Law Committee.
Um, we are a group of criminal defense lawyers practicing
primarily out of Auckland,
and we work in some of the busiest courts in the country.
Um, I propose to speak quickly
to three key points in our written submissions.
Um, the first is, is the topic
that the previous submitters just covered.
It's the proposed expansion of the citizens arrest powers.
Of course, it's commendable that Parliament is trying
to do something about the retail crime problem,
but we don't think this is the way to go about it.
And of course, there's an inherent level of risk when
a citizen confronts a shoplifter for both the shop employee
or shopkeeper and the person doing the shoplifting.
And we've just heard the submissions from Woolworths
and they painted quite a vivid picture of the kinds
of confrontations that can happen.
Um, and they're the ones who have the most
to gain from the tougher,
a tougher approach from retail crime.
And it says quite, it says something about these proposals
that they're also firmly against them.
Um, these, this proposed expansion
of the citizens arrest powers,
it really puts both parties into a combustible situation
and it's going to turn a benign shoplifting into a situation
that requires an ambulance
to be caught out for one or both parties.
Um, the second point is in relation to the extended
aggravated assault provisions for first responders
and corrections officers.
Um, we're troubled by the fact
that there's nothing in these provisions as drafted
that requires the defendant to know
that the victim was a first responder
or a corrections officer
or to have any intention
to obstruct them in the course of their duties.
Um, if the policy reason for these, uh, extended offenses is
to deter assaults on first responders
or corrections officers, then there's no reason
to impose the greater sanction
where the defendant doesn't know of the victim's office.
Um, we, we are also slightly hustled by the new
proposed section 1 7 1 A
and that's the provision that provides it's manslaughter
to kill a person by a coward punch
where the killing occurs in circumstances amounting
to culpable homicide but not murder or infanticide.
Um, this seems just
to just restate the existing 1 6 8 3 of the Crimes Act,
which, um, already provides that except for in cases
of infanticide homicide is already murder.
So it doesn't, the new section, uh,
1 7 1 A doesn't really add anything in our view.
The third, um, area of concern is the new offenses relating
to coward punches and,
and the greater maximum offenses for, uh,
the greater maximum penalties for those offenses.
Um, the existing law we have,
we have a tariff case, um,
I'm sure the committees also aware it's the queen and tiki
and it sets out the factors
that the court takes into account for grievers bodily harm.
And there's another case called nuku, which sort
of adapts tiki for, um, cases of lower level assaults.
And those cases already recognize that the attacking
of the head and that the vulnerability of the victim,
that they're already aggravating factors, um,
in sentencing someone for assault.
So judges already take these factors into account
and they do routinely impose high sentences
where these features occur, um,
compared to cases where they don't.
So, uh, it, it, it's difficult to, for us to see
what exactly these new offenses hope
to achieve when the existing law
and RV already takes, um, these factors into account.
Alright. Can we ask some questions?
Yes, of course. Cool.
Uh, just so just dealing with the last case, um,
we've heard evidence that, uh, looking at New Zealand
judgments on average is about three
and three quarter years for, uh, cases
where coward punches occurred.
Whereas, uh,
and we've got one very compelling, uh, submission by
a former police detective whose son was killed
because the son didn't, uh,
remained living, even though he was in a state where he was,
um, a survivable situation.
He couldn't, the offender couldn't be prosecuted
for manslaughter, um, or even murder,
but it was under a lesser charge.
And so, uh, there's two things to, to say,
and this is what submitters have said.
One is the judgements that courts are handing down are not,
uh, proportionate, uh, compared to other cases.
And also the definition of it, um, doesn't, uh,
highlight the type of situation that is occurred,
which is a deliberate act.
Well, how would you respond to that?
Um, well, well at least in, in my experience, the judges
that I've appeared in front
of in my 12 years in the criminal law,
it's they carry out the sentencing process carefully.
Um, they take into a range, a a variety of factors that,
that the law said they must take into account
under the sentencing act.
And they generally arrived at
a balanced considered sentence.
And if, if, um, the prosecution, if it is inadequate,
the prosecution will usually take steps to appeal.
So I can't comment on the specifics of the three year
and three that was handed down, um, which you, um,
obviously considered to be inadequate.
Okay. Um, so, so it's, it it's hard to
talk about, um, perhaps
sentencing specifically.
Um, without saying without,
I suppose I would just generally say that this, the way
that the judges are going about balancing these factors in,
uh, my experience
and in the committee experience, it, it's adequate to deal
with this kind of eventing.
Okay. Just, uh, on your very first point about, um,
first responders, if someone's wearing a fire officer
uniform or an ambulance uniform, would that,
would that meet your test that you highlight that
the offender must know
that the person was a first responder?
Or are you suggesting it needs to be beyond that,
that the person has to say, I'm your ambulance officer?
No, I'm not suggesting that at all. Um, but, but
No, that's my question.
So if you're wearing a uniform
and someone gets, uh, hit by someone, the treating
with the fire officer or whatever, is that, would
that meet your test of knowing
the, the issue that you raised?
Would that meet the test that they need to know
that they were dealing with a first offender?
I suppose if you can show that the defendant
saw the uniform, um,
that the first responder was wearing a uniform
and subjectively appreciated
that this was a first responder acting in the course of his
or her duty, then yes it would.
Okay. Alright. Cool. Right. Any other questions?
Hey, look, really appreciate you joining us this afternoon.
Uh, it's very helpful as usual, um,
from your association. So thank you very much.
Thank you. Right now we're going to, uh, Ms.
Anna nos, I think Ms.
Nos, are you able to join us?
Are you there? Ms. Nos?
She, you're there. Mi ms.
Nos, we can't hear you or see you, unfortunately.
Can you hear me now? Yes, we can. Loud and clear.
Great. Right, we've got, uh, five minutes with you.
Uh, we've read your submission, it's obviously, um,
challenging situation, but, um,
please just let us ask some questions as well.
Have you gone?
No, I'm still here. Okay.
So I've, I've written an oral submission, um,
between my mother, Jean Hamilton,
who has hopefully also been able to join.
Uh, no, we haven't seen your,
your mother's not on, unfortunately,
She hasn't joined, No.
Okay. So I was going to read the,
our oral submission on, on our behalf,
Or do you wanna just start with that while we wait
and if we can get it on, we, that'd be fantastic.
Yes. Okay. So these, these comments are, um, in addition
to the submissions that both myself
and Jean Hamilton have, have done in oral.
So these comments relate to the sudden strike to the head
or neck, which is section 180 8 A
of the crimes amendment bill.
This seems to now be known as the coward punch,
but the section itself does not isolate that the strikers
with a hand or another body part or weapon.
The indication of it is the cow punch C clause limits
and appears very specific
and in our opinion is too specific.
So a family member of ours was assaulted
by a physically bigger man using a
samurai sword as his weapon.
He kept this beside the driver's seat of his car.
The attacker chased my family member
and struck him on the neck with the sword.
The sword had a wooden sheath at the time during the attack.
Had it not, he probably would've been
beheaded as he was hit.
The wooden sheath broke
and the sword traveled up to break his jaw
and sever the artery in his neck.
It removed the top of his shoulder on the back swing.
He was left to bleed out on the roadside drain
and the attacker drove off with his wife
and two little children in the car.
We, we were advised that our family member was unlikely
to survive as a result of the attack
and losing vital muscles and tendons in the shoulder injury.
Our family member is unable to lift his arm fully.
He is now unable to work in his chosen field of expertise,
a highly qualified and experienced electrical engineer.
The secure financial situation he has been able to provide
for himself and his family has been taken from him
and will affect them long term, including the funds
that they thought they would have available
to them at the time of retirement.
He lives with constant pain, unable to sleep,
which affects other parts of his life, such
as concentration and memory.
The attacker shrugged off his actions
as being stupid raid road road rage.
It was deemed in the court that he was struck
with a piece of wood.
The sentencing judge talked about other previous cases
and what punishment was given
and continually advised he needed to be less restrictive.
The impact of this coly Act seems
to have not had any bearing on the sentence.
The attacker got off with 10 months home detention
and Insultingly was told to pay $5,000.
The system has allowed his defense
to treat the process like a game
and marginalizes actions
for getting the damage he has
inflicted on another human being.
Unfortunately in New Zealand today, the
situation is not uncommon.
We believe that the impact on the victim's life needs
to be fully understood.
The seriousness of the impacts needs
to be taken into account as part of the sentencing.
The accused should not be able to amend their plea
and in doing so, reduce their sentence, be allowed
to discount the sentence.
So it does not fit the crime they have committed.
We believe that this cowardly act in similar cases,
should meet the section of the act.
The section should not be limited
to one narrow specific action.
As an example, a co cowardly punch.
It should include any other cowardly action.
Thank you.
Hey, thank you Ms. Noes, uh, for sharing that.
I, um, just appreciate, um,
how difficult that must be for you.
Um, now members, I've got a,
a question from Mr. Todd Stevenson. Yeah.
Oh, thank you Anna. And thank you
for sharing both your story in writing and,
and today about your family member.
Just a question, I obviously with this coward punch, uh,
and look, obviously we're gonna take into account
what you've said and see whether, um,
circumstances you described would fit.
Well, obviously one of the kind of,
when people think about coward punches is the kind of, um,
unprovoked nature.
Often it's by someone who didn't know the victim.
W was that the case with your family member?
Was this kind of out of the blue?
He, he was driving along, he was driving along the road
that my brother lives on, and he was walking the dog
and it's just the case zone.
And so my brother stepped out
and when he drove past him, he tapped the roof
and the guy backed up and took the sword out
and hit him, hit him with it.
But my brother was very defensive,
so I didn't have any defense on him.
And so he tried to get away from the situation.
He didn't know him. There hadn't been any earlier kind
of spark factor that occurred
Absolutely random. Yeah.
The family have, yes, the family believed that it was
totally unprecedented behavior from just a normal
member of the family.
Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Given that he never cared enough
to go and call an ambulance, they just got back in the car
and with his family and he,
and he drove off, he left in there to bleed out.
Yeah. Outrageous. Terrific. All right.
Hey, thanks Anna for, um, being with us today.
And, uh, Peter, your mother wasn't able to be here,
but we've heard your submission and thank you for your time.
Thank you very much. Okay.
Now we've got the Royal, uh, Australasian
and New Zealand College of Psychiatrist.
Hello. Nice to see you.
Are you on your own or, um, Bronte,
uh, Jeffries, is that right?
Yes. I'm, I'm gonna be, um, presenting, I think, uh,
Oh, good. We've got 10
minutes with you.
We've, we've, we've read, so maybe just do the high points
and then hopefully we've got some questions for you.
Sure. Well, look, thank, thank you very much
for taking time to hear our submission.
Um, so my name's Dr. James Kaney.
I'm the chair of the, um, New Zealand branch of the faculty
of Forensic Psychiatry, which is a faculty
of the Royal Australia New Zealand College of Psychiatry.
Um, just mindful of the time, um, the, the forensic
psychiatry sits at the interface between, uh,
the criminal justice system and the mental health systems.
And, and we're particularly interested in this bill, um, in
that it puts into focus many of the issues
that occupy our thinking.
Um, personally, um, I've been contemplating a lot
of these issues for 20 years of my career,
and we're not gonna get through those in the,
in the limited time available today.
But the, the bill does bring into focus a number
of those long-term systemic problems.
Um, my personal interest in the bill is, um,
I've been 15 years
as a forensic psychiatrist working in Auckland, uh,
forensic systems, um,
and more recently have come into the community system.
And by way of, uh, sort of setting the scene
as forensic psychiatrists, we constantly observe, um,
what you could characterize as failures
of the mental health system to adequately attend
to the needs of people that ultimately leads
to them coming into a, uh, criminal justice setting, such
that we characterize this
as the prisons being the new revolving door
for serious mental illness, um, in lieu
of any other treatment option.
So with that background, um, we, we do oppose the bill,
um, particularly
because we see it as, uh, yet another mechanism to lead
to the criminalization of people
with serious mental illnesses.
Um, we also believe that the criminal enhanced criminal
penalties are not going to be a deterrent
for this population.
Um, evidence from Australia suggests that, um,
in no small part
because the nature of, uh, a crisis event
with somebody who's acutely unwell, uh,
more than often means they lack capacity to actually, um,
make informed judgment
or have the increased tariff as a deterrent.
Um, and that leads to a knock on effect with, um,
issues such as being found unfit,
stand trial legally insane, which has a corollary
of an increased, uh, burden on the courts for
medicolegal reports, et cetera, et cetera.
Um, the final point we just wanna comment on
as well is we're concerned about the, um, addition
of the citizens arrest powers.
We would be, uh, very
concerned about, um, citizens approaching people
who turned out, in fact,
to have a serious psychotic episode.
Um, a citizen is unlikely to be able to ascertain that,
and we just see that as potentially, um,
a very fraught, um, encounter.
Um, what what we would like,
and you've seen our submissions ion mission
from our policy analysis.
Um, we, we do think there are, there are some, um,
solutions, some alternative approaches
to managing this cohort.
Um, in the, in the submission,
it speaks about co response teams.
Um, I know Minister Ducey has visited the white
matar where I work.
Um, he, he's seen how these teams operate
and we, we just think it would probably be wiser
to invest in certain mental health services that can, um,
deescalate the encounter,
prevent an offense occurring in the first instance,
or if it does,
having some capacity in the legislation perhaps to account
for the fact that these people were not, um, criminally
liable for the offending.
So, um, a diminished capacity type of, um, clause.
So look, just mindful I could spend, um, 20 years
of, uh, thinking about these issues.
I could go on and on. Probably it's, it's a better use
of the time if, if you had questions, um, perhaps, but yeah.
Right. I got the first one from honorable Dr. Duncan lead.
Uh, thanks for that look.
Um, and thanks for all your work in this space.
Really difficult, um, area, uh, your stuff
around diminished responsibility is, is interesting
because some jurisdictions do have, um,
a particular diminished responsibility kind
of framework, which we don't.
Um, what what we tend to do is, um, have that as a factor,
you know, um, someone who's got mental health issues
but is not kind of legally, if you like, in saying, um,
that's taken into account in sentencing.
Um, can, have you got any views around the kind of,
um, the arguments we are hearing about
reducing judicial discretion
and sentencing around particularly
as regards mental health issues?
Mm. Um, that's a big question. Well, you, you're right.
Um, internationally, there,
there are different mechanisms dealing
with mental health people, um,
depending on the jurisdiction.
So the UK and, uh, Netherlands have a, um,
de definite diminished capacity defense.
Um, other extremes
or to the other extreme, I think New South Wales, uh,
that they have a diversionary mechanism
where somebody can very quickly
be diverted under the mental health act to avoid the need
for, um, a, a criminal case at all.
Uh, I take the point that the, um,
that sentencing can often, um, cover this off and, but,
but it's, it's the delay in that, um, if somebody
with a more, um, serious tariff
for assaulting a first responder goes to prison, um, yes,
justice will be served,
but it's the timeframe with which it takes to get to trial.
And this could potentially, um, lead
to somebody acutely unwell in a prison setting, uh,
with delays to get into a forensic unit for treatment, um,
delays to get to court for bail,
which would probably be opposed if the tariff was higher
and to an, a general mental health unit.
So, so yes, I, I take your point,
but it would be that timeframe in custody.
Police do currently have discretion, um, and,
and it taps into a little bit
of the co response teams that we're talking about.
Um, the frontline offices are, are, are usually pretty good
and reasonable with dealing with our clientele,
and they'll use discretion on whether to charge them for a,
um, you know, a punch or a kick
or a spitting at them or something like that.
Um, and we'll divert them
to mental health units without laying charges.
Um, I guess the concern is if the tariff for
what might be a low level, um, common assault raises that,
that might up the bar for their discretion to divert and,
and inadvertently lead to more people being
Yes. In
custody. Uh, uh, James, I've got two more questions.
First one from Reman. Nalay.
Hello, James. Um, so part of your recommendations is
that there, um, shouldn't be criminal penalties
for assaults against, um, first responders, as you said,
because untrained people responding to
it's should be more about training people to respond
to mental health crisis.
Um, St. John's earlier when they gave us their submission,
said that, um, in their opinion, well,
not in their opinion from what they've, they've, um,
deduced about 54, 50% of the time, um, with these attacks.
It's from bystanders, not people
that are suffering from mental health issues.
They acknowledged the mental health issue situation.
And also, um, they said that even in the last few months,
a lot of them are people that are just, uh, um, interfering.
So would that change your view with respect
to these increased penalties?
Um, well, I guess our brief is, is specifically
around the people with the mental health
problem, them themselves.
Um, I, I don't feel qualified
to speak on a lay person assaulting a,
um, a first responder.
Um, but yeah,
Sorry, sorry if, if I may,
but you are suggesting that we remove these changes Yeah.
Removing, that's the submission.
Yes. Well, well, um, with the caveat that, uh,
our focuses on the people
with serious mental illness, so yes.
Removing this, the would
So, so, James, the, the nuance of the question is
you, we think you've proposed a wholehearted
removal of those causes as opposed to coming up
for a solution with those mental illness
and how that might fit within that context.
Well, I, I guess that's, um,
threading the needle, isn't it? Yes,
Not really. Not really.
Well, well, uh, if, if there wasn't provision for, um,
a diminished capacity clause
or something in relation to the mental
mentally unwell people, yes,
we would then oppose the bill in its entirety.
Okay. Now I've got, kind
Of follows on to my question and
Todd Stevenson, thanks For your submission.
I mean, yeah, I mean,
not everyone who's committing an assault against a first
responder or undertaking retail crime,
which is the other big issue we've got is living
with a mental health issue, right?
Yes. So I think,
but you do, we have, do you have any figures on
how many people committing, say retail crime may have
mental health issues, or,
Um, if you just allow me, we
retail crime, probably not.
Um, in terms of ambulance call outs,
I think we do somewhere in the submission, um,
I've just lost it for the moment,
but there's certainly a 152% increase in, um,
police mental health callouts, people with mental illness.
Yeah. So, but, uh, shoplifting, no,
I guess what we're trying to balance here is we,
we all accept that someone's got a mental health issue that
that may factor into why they commit a crime,
whether it's an assault or whatever.
But, but we've also gotta, we've also got to try and capture
and, and deal with the people
who are just committing crimes,
whether it's an assault on first responder or retail.
Yes. Just so, again, without any numbers we're Yeah,
it's a bit hard for us to kind of Yeah.
Understand what you, the problem that you are.
I mean, we understand the problem,
but the size of the problem
you're outlining. But thank you.
Hey, thank, thank you, James.
We're out of time, but thank you for coming on board, um,
and making that submission on behalf of your, um,
uh, your organization. You're very
Welcome. Thank you.
Thank you. Right now, uh, we're going to,
I dunno, is it Mr.
And Mrs. I know, I know.
Um, we've got 10 minutes
with you. Thank
You.
Um, you have my written submissions.
Um, and thank you for the opportunity to be here today.
Um, sentencing outcomes do not begin in a court.
They're shaped much earlier by investigative decisions,
charging frameworks, and the structural settings
of the justice system itself.
Law signaled this what a society is prepared to tolerate.
Where violence foreseeably takes a life to response to.
The justice system must leave no ambiguity about the value
we place on that life law.
Um, I speak from a dual perspective.
I see as a detective investigating serious violent crime in
very high court prosecution files.
I understand how evidential decisions shape outcomes long
before a judge, um, considers sentence.
I'm also the father of Daniel Nikko, who was killed by a cow
to punch assault in July, 2025.
That dual perspective investigator
and bereaved parent allows me to see clearly
where the system works
and where the structural pressures shape outcomes the public
really see from my policing career.
I understand how serious violence investigations are built
and how evidence establishes intent,
recklessness, and culpability.
I also understand the consequences when
that investigative work is not
pursued to the highest standard.
The judges cannot sentence on facts never established.
By the time a judge enters a courtroom, the full seriousness
of the violence may already be lost
in the evidential record.
Sadly, that is not a theoretical concern for me.
It is a lived experience for my family.
It is from that position that I offer my submission.
So how are justice outcomes shaped?
Sentenced outcomes are shaped long
before a judge enters a courtroom.
The decisive point is the police investigation.
Police are the first
and most powerful determiners of justice in New Zealand.
Not because they sentence, but
because they create the evidential record the entire justice
system must operate within.
Judges can only sense on on what is lawfully before them.
If critical evidence is not gathered early,
it does not exist later.
If aggravating features are not fully investigated,
if recklessness is not fully developed,
sentencing seriousness
and ly narrows investigation,
classification shapes everything.
Fatal road crashes automatically trigger
specialist investigative protocols.
Life-threatening assaults often do not.
My son survived for two days
because paramedics intubated him at the scene.
As a father, I would give anything
for him still to be alive.
But as a former detective,
I must say something uncomfortable.
From a justice perspective,
it would have been better if Daniel died at the scene
from a, just because then the system would have been
required to treat the case as a homicide from the outset.
Mm-hmm. Triggering full homicide pro protocols in the
highest seriousness lens.
Instead, because he survived for two days,
the case initially entered the system as a serious assault.
While I sat with my son in the back
of an ambulance known there was no brain function.
Knowing my son was going to come home in a coffin,
I expected one simple question from a
detective to the paramedic.
Is he going to die? No, detective came.
I did not see my first detective until they came
to take my son to the mortuary.
Three days later, police off offense.
Classification is not simply a label, it is architecture.
It determines what evidence is pursued
and how seriousness is ultimately presented to the court.
That matters because when unor of violence results in death,
the loss of life must anchor the seriousness
of the offending.
When a life is taken, consequence must lead not follow
when even where a proper starting point is set,
cumulative sentence discounts can significantly
reduce the final sentence.
Discounts of up to 25% are re routinely applied
for early guilty please.
But where the evidence is already overwhelming,
CTC took footage, eyewitnesses emissions, the moral value of
of that plea is significantly diminished.
In Daniel's case, the evidence was overwhelming from an
outset, yet full, early plea dis discounts were applied.
The question is not whether sentence discounts should exist.
The question is whether the cumulative effect
preserves portion ality in life has been taken
from the moment an offender is encouraged
to hand themselves in the system begins extending benefits
credit for surrender credit for early plea,
and often the benefit of a narrowed investigation.
Once a lesser charge is secured,
those benefits continue at sentencing.
Where personal circumstances such as youth remorse, family
responsibilities, and other mitigating features are
carefully weighed under the existing framework.
Victims and their families receive no equivalent weight.
They're left to sit in court and watch their dead sons
and man are stripped away,
stripp away his life worth reduce through discounts,
mitigation, and legal calibration by strangers.
It is also important to recognize
that system incentives influence operational behavior
throughout the justice system.
Justice sector policy increasingly prioritize efficiency
and early resolution.
These goals are legitimate, legitimate, um,
but there are fewer equal visible incentives focused on
evidential completeness and serious violence cases.
When incentives are unevenly distribute,
distributed institutional behavior naturally follows the
measured outcome that is structural gravity.
You'll note I did not center my submission on mandatory
minimum sentences.
That was deliberate. Minimum sentences alone cannot fix
structural waiting within the justice system.
Manslaughter already carries life imprisonment
as its maximum penalty.
Minimums established the floor,
but system architecture determines
where serious settles above the floor.
There is also structural risk the committee should consider
if manslaughter carries a clear minimum sentence,
for example, eight years,
it can become the system's pressure release valve
for police securing a certain manslaughter conviction
with a known minimum sentence can become operationally safer
than pursuing murder
where the non-par parole period is higher
and the evidential threshold harder to prove.
Defense counsel understands this dynamic
and offender facing a risk of a murder conviction
with a tenure or longer non parole period has every
incentive to plead guilty to manslaughter once a guilty plea
to manslaughter is secured, the operational incentive
to continue testing whether evidence supports higher
culpability can diminish the risk is
that the minimum census becomes not a floor,
not just a floor, but an informal benchmark
for the value of a life lost.
For that reason, my submission focuses
on structural settings.
Minimums are just endpoint, um, architecture
to determines the outcome.
So section seven
and eight of the sentencing Act 2002 formed the core core
architecture for sentencing in New Zealand.
Section seven sets out the purpose.
Section eight establishes the key principles,
including proportionality and the least restrictive outcome.
Requirement and practices creates a structural
balance of the exercise.
Judges must weigh the seriousness of the harm
and culpability against the legal requirement
to impose the least restrictive, um,
sentence appropriate for the offender.
That means mitigation, rehabilitation
and personal circumstances are always drawn into the
sentencing analysis.
As those factors accumulate the gravity of life's, uh,
a a life loss can gradually recede within the
sentencing, um, calculus.
And this parliament means those provisions directly judges
remain bound to apply that balancing framework.
Sentencing practice is also shaped by appellate guidance,
including cases such as rv,
which establish seriousness bans and starting points.
My understanding is that this bill strengthen the statutory
signaling around seriousness,
but it does not alter the underlining
sentencing architecture.
So my position is simple, pass the bill,
but do not mistake sibling for structural change
members of the committee.
There's one final reality I need to acknowledge.
When a loved one is killed through violence,
families enter the justice system
believing they are victims.
But what many of us experience is something different.
We are not participants in the process.
We sit in court listening
to legal arguments about mental states and mitigation,
and gradually realize something profound.
We are not the victim's.
The crown is you begin to feel less like a victim
and more like an observer to the process that determines
what your child's life is worth.
The truth many families carries is this,
we are not treated as victims.
We are just witnesses to our own catastrophe.
Strengthening public co confidence may require properly
resourced victims legal support system
for families in serious violence cases
with independent representation.
Because justice is not only about the offender
or crown agencies.
In conclusion, parliament is not merely a adjusting penalty.
Here it is expressing society's moral judgment
about the value of human life.
This bill sends an important signal,
but signals alone do not change System behavior.
Justice outcomes are shaped upstream by investigation,
evidential framing,
charging decisions in the statutory architecture
that guides seriousness.
If a catastrophic harm does not clearly anchor the
that analysis, when a life is lost,
public con confidence will remain fragile.
This is a call for visible proportionality
because behind every policy discussion like this,
there is a name for my family.
That name is Daniel Ani.
For every family sitting in a courtroom after,
after catastrophic violence, the question is the same.
Does the justice system visibly reflect the value
of the life that was lost passed the bill,
but ensure the system behind it reflects that value?
Thank you. Um, members, uh,
first one from, uh,
I just wanna start off by saying I'm sorry
for your deep loss.
Uh, we hear a lot when we're trying to strengthen penalties
that um, we should be looking at other things to, to um,
address the issues that led to people committing crimes.
And I guess what enrages me is situations like yours.
While you are grieving people should be, um,
we are encouraged to look at why they,
why they committed this crime.
How do you feel about that train of thought?
There's a lot of issues raised
or excuses raised for people committing crime
and violent crime.
But my response is that, um,
those excuses didn't punch Daniel and Lum an individual did.
And then the aggravating factors around
that will build the case would've
or should have built a case to show
that it was it was targeted.
Um, he was pursued
and um, the individual, um, killed him.
But, so there's a whole range
of issues is I've heard colonization's a problem.
Um, poor background trauma, but,
but they didn't punch anyone in the face.
An individual did.
And I've, you've gotta accept
that there's all these fundamental underlying problems
in society as well.
Um, but for me,
an individual made a decision.
Okay. I've got, thank you.
I've got a question from Mr. Todd. Steven,
Thank, thank you for both, for being here
and I don't want to upset you more,
but can you tell us a bit more about Daniel?
How old was he? What was he like?
Uh, Daniel was a twin.
Um, he was 37 years of age. He was an academic.
Um, he excelled throughout his,
out his school career.
He was a top student. He loved photography.
He ended up in Australia working for the Melbourne,
um, national Gallery.
National Gallery. Oh wow. Um, as their videographer.
And he also freelancers a videographer and a photographer.
So eight years came home, um, to New Zealand
'cause he wanted to be closer to family and friends.
So yeah, he was a gentle, gentle guy.
Um, everyone loved him.
Um, he, yeah, it's,
there's so many accolades you can bestow on Daniel.
Um, but he was just one of those guys.
Um, he was not agro at all. He was totally the opposite.
Yeah. Can I,
Sorry, we we're running out of time
and I don't wanna this unnecessarily,
but can I ask that from a legal perspective,
because as a committee we've been asked
to look at a piece of legislation.
You've raised structural issues around, uh,
getting evidence and, and very pertinent questions.
Right. My question I was just trying to search through
from a, from the legal perspective,
from this bill perspective, is the classification
of a coward punch, is that enough
to set it down a different pathway
or, so I'm just thinking in a legal term
and I'm trying to get your advice on that.
Or are you suggesting that this Bill
re at least recognizes the issue of coward punch
and goes some way to addressing,
but you were saying outside of that you want the committee
to advocate for this other stuff.
Um, I want the committee just
to understand this new legislation is legislating into the
existing system and, and architecture
and, um, if that's not changed, then you'll,
it will still come back to the same, um, legal arguments.
Yeah. And still come back to section eight and section seven
and eight, RRV, all the other palant cases. So what
Would you do? Sorry, uh,
because this is
where you can really help us, right?
What, what are you suggesting in the legislation
that would really help get us the focus, you know,
your issue between a homicide and manslaughter
or serious assault?
I think that's your point of definition.
Unfortunately, with your son who lived for two,
two days afterwards, put it in a different category
Irrespective of all the legal connotations.
They police determine justice in New Zealand.
Yeah. If they don't gather,
if they don't gather all the evidence
Yeah. At the time to
prove
Yeah. To present to
the court. Yeah.
You are still get the, the, the judges can only sense
to what's delivered for them.
Yeah. So that's why you'll end up getting Yeah.
Course all these like sentences for cow purchase,
there's also the classification, there's also, um,
the circumstances around it.
But I I, from what I've read
and researched, it's not taken seriously and,
and the legislation doesn't take it seriously.
What were you gonna say, Christine?
No, no, I wasn't gonna say anything.
I just reiterate what Peter's actually saying.
I just think that it actually started from the beginning.
They'd actually decided what they were actually going
to charge him with before they even investigated.
Yeah. Okay. What we meant to do. Alright.
Hey, uh, I want to say thank you to both of you.
We obviously can, uh, see the pain
and also feel it, um,
no parent would even want to go through this.
So, um,
Thank that's one of the reasons why we're here.
Yeah. And not, not so much so
for Dan Daniel's mana restoring Daniel's mana,
but so, um, it doesn't happen again.
Yeah. Yeah. And we, we really appreciate you.
We, so thank you for coming this morning. Yeah.
Well thank you for listening to us.
Right. Um, our last submitter, um,
who I see walked in, um, Michael Ango visit, uh,
from Walk Without Fair Trust.
You're our last submitter today.
Um, and we have 10 minutes with you.
Great.
We're rarely aware these, um, in my current role,
so just have to wait a moment for my eyes to adjust.
Uh, first of all, thank you for the opportunity
to speak with you all today.
My name is Mike Kgo.
I'm the secretary of the Wout Fair Charitable Trust.
We're a Kiwi charity
and we have a specific mission to eliminate the coward punch
and a more general mission,
which we're heavily involved in working
with police on preventing street violence.
We're not lawyers, uh, we're not policy analysts,
nor are we politicians.
What we are is combat sports practitioners who are
intimately acquainted with violence.
Our chairman Eugene Berryman
and I are lifelong martial artists and coaches.
I or we have cornered over a thousand competitive bouts.
And on a personal level, I've witnessed well
and truly more than a hundred street fights
and twice being the victim of a coward punch.
But beyond those credentials, we prayed
for a miracle in hospital for nine days
as a teammate, fa vay lay dying.
We were there when the decision to switch off.
Life support was made.
We were there when his daughter was told her father
was not coming home.
And it's through this lens of lived experience
that we're approaching this legislation.
Hopefully we can offer something a little bit unique.
We unreservedly support specific offenses,
recognizing the card punch as a distinct
and serious category of violence
and of the proposed offense
of culpable homicide with death results.
We also support the recent sentencing Reform Amendment Act
changes, restricting judicial discounts.
Naming the coward punch in statute
puts a stake in the ground.
It removes the ambiguity that has allowed perpetrators
to escape accountability,
but it doesn't go far enough without mini,
without mandatory minimum non-pro sentences at risks being
largely symbolic.
You've heard legal definitions today allow me
to offer a practitioner's definition.
It's a deliberate blow.
It's delivered without warning to the most vulnerable part
of the body under the most vulnerable of circumstances.
Its sole purpose is
to render the victim immediately unconscious.
And sadly, death from a coward punch is too often treated
as an unfortunate consequence.
A little bit of bad luck for the perpetrator, as if chance
and not a deliberate choice caused that outcome.
And that framing is wrong.
It's not impulsive, it is deliberate, and it is calculated.
And combat sports strikes
to a defensive opponent are prohibited, priced precisely
because they uniquely lethal a relaxed jaw,
an embraced body, a hard surface on the way down.
These are the conditions that kill.
It's not the force, it's the circumstances of that delivery.
And medical evidence is unambiguous.
A single punch can cause traumatic brain injury or death.
The coward punch must be treated in law
as carrying a lethality risk comparable
to a blunt force weapon.
I'd also add it's a street thug's first strike tool.
It's a gateway blow
that incapacitates immediately leaving the victim
entirely at their attacker's mercy.
With these consequences so well documented,
particularly in the the modern age,
no perpetrator can credibly claim ignorance.
That decision to throw the punch
is actually a declaration of intent.
As you've heard. The catalyst for our being here is the 2021
killing of our teammate Faki.
And this is a case study in why this legislation exists
and also why it does not yet go far enough.
On the night that Fae was fatally struck, he
and his brother Ika were making their way home.
For large men, at least two of whom had history of violence
set upon them without provocation.
Foe was killed by a deliberate, fully leveraged left hook,
thrown by a man who waited on the sidelines to strike.
And he knew exactly what he was doing.
He was someone in the trade
or who he would call in the trade.
Uh, in an experienced hitter having struck the fatal blow,
Daniel Harley stepped over foe's dying body.
Several steps forward, he grabbed his brother Ika
by the head and by the hair, knee him in the face
and punched him several more times.
No hesitation. There was no concern
for the man he'd effectively killed, only clinically
executed violence.
After nine days in a coma, po life support was withdrawn
and that curtain was dropped and it was dropped
because no one wants
to see his brain dead body convulse
in the last vestiges of life
and his family were left to explain to three-year-old Issa
that daddy would not be waking up just over a year later
or just under a year later, rather at sentencing.
The judge described the blow
as not the most forceful of punches.
That's a description reflecting either a gross
misunderstanding of punch mechanics
or an indifference to them.
And again, this is not about force,
it's about the defenselessness of the target, the absence
of warning and the unraced impact Hali made.
Make no mistake, he was deliberate, he was calculated
and he was predatory.
The sentence is two years and nine months.
He was paroled in 11 months.
11 months for a man's life.
Today I still coach FO's brothers.
There were four of them now three
that changed train in our gym.
I was working with Ika yesterday
and he carries a survivor's guilt
that no sentence will ever address.
Siani has never fully recovered. He's mentally broken.
His family serves a life sentence. The killer did not.
In both cases. An isolated as you've just heard,
Daniel Nagan, Daniel Nale was killed by repeat offender.
Daytona Thompson. Another coward punch,
another history of violence.
Just judge Justice radish stated very plainly when
sentencing, he could not have regard to community desire.
For more severe sentences,
I must apply the law as it stands.
Well that's not actually a judicial failure,
it's parliament's failure and only parliament can fix it.
As we look at sentencing, I'll just note
that in our written submission we cited an average sentence
of three years, four months,
having since accessed Westlaw's sentencing tracker,
the more accurate figure is two years and five months.
And I'll be using that figure today.
The average sentence for manslaughter
by coward punch in New Zealand is two years
and five months average time served
before parole eligibility, 14 months.
And more than 25%
of those convicted are sentenced to home detention.
That's a quarter of those convicted of causing death
with a deliberate action.
And there's not even a custodial sentence.
In New South Wales and Victoria, across the Tasman
where parliament has intervened, average sentences,
sentences exceed nine years
with non parole periods commonly above six.
It wasn't achieved by braver judges, it was achieved
by parliament changing the law.
Now, when you consider that the average sentence
for fraud is three years, five months more than a year
above the killing, uh, the average
for killing someone with a coward punch.
Uh, sentencing frameworks own logic suggests a human wife,
uh, a human life is worth less than a
fraudulent transaction.
Mr. Ango, sorry, we are gonna have to go to the house.
Um, do you wanna just say some final comments?
Well, my final comments and it takes 40 seconds. Yeah.
Uh, we support the Coward Punch as a specific offense,
cual homicide, where death results, the inclusion
of both those offenses under three strikes.
Legislation is directionally correct and important,
but without mandatory minimum non-pro period,
this will not achieve a deterrent
effect or protect the public.
The bill must include a minimum non-pro period
of eight years for killing someone with a co punch.
Maximum penalties do not determine sentencing outcomes.
Mandatory minimums, do I just finish up in just racing
through and just say that the bill
before this committee is a meaningful step,
but it's a step, not a destination.
Without that mandatory non-par parole period,
sentencing precedent will not change.
Judges can't change it. Only Parliament can. Okay.
Faki was 25 years old when he died.
He was a son, a brother, a father, and a teammate.
His daughter grows up without him.
His brothers will carry wounds that will never fully heal.
The man who killed him served 11 months.
Hey, now, um, just wanna say
thank you for your submission.
Unfortunately we do not have time.
We've got all of us gotta be
through there very shortly in a matter of minutes.
But I wanna thank you for your submission.
Uh, it wasn't easy for you to do that.
Um, we've all read the submission and very compelling.
So thank you very much. Thank you.
Now can I ask, I need to clear the room, uh, right now.
Sorry if I stay, just um, I don't take it as rude.
Thank you very much. Thank you.